10. Regular Expression Matching | Algorithms | Hard | String, Dynamic Programming, Backtracking

[TOC]

## Solution

---
#### Approach 1: Recursion

**Intuition**

If there were no Kleene stars (the `*` wildcard character for regular expressions), the problem would be easier - we simply check from left to right if each character of the text matches the pattern.

When a star is present, we may need to check many different suffixes of the text and see if they match the rest of the pattern.  A recursive solution is a straightforward way to represent this relationship.

**Algorithm**

Without a Kleene star, our solution would look like this:




If a star is present in the pattern, it will be in the second position $$\text{pattern[1]}$$.  Then, we may ignore this part of the pattern, or delete a matching character in the text.  If we have a match on the remaining strings after any of these operations, then the initial inputs matched.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: Let $$T, P$$ be the lengths of the text and the pattern respectively.  In the worst case, a call to `match(text[i:], pattern[2j:])` will be made $$\binom{i+j}{i}$$ times, and strings of the order $$O(T - i)$$ and $$O(P - 2*j)$$ will be made.  Thus, the complexity has the order $$\sum_{i = 0}^T \sum_{j = 0}^{P/2} \binom{i+j}{i} O(T+P-i-2j)$$.  With some effort outside the scope of this article, we can show this is bounded by $$O\big((T+P)2^{T + \frac{P}{2}}\big)$$.

* Space Complexity:  For every call to `match`, we will create those strings as described above, possibly creating duplicates.  If memory is not freed, this will also take a total of $$O\big((T+P)2^{T + \frac{P}{2}}\big)$$ space, even though there are only order $$O(T^2 + P^2)$$ unique suffixes of $$P$$ and  $$T$$ that are actually required.


---
#### Approach 2: Dynamic Programming

**Intuition**

As the problem has an **optimal substructure**, it is natural to cache intermediate results.  We ask the question $$\text{dp(i, j)}$$: does $$\text{text[i:]}$$ and $$\text{pattern[j:]}$$ match?  We can describe our answer in terms of answers to questions involving smaller strings.

**Algorithm**

We proceed with the same recursion as in [Approach 1](#approach-1-recursion), except because calls will only ever be made to `match(text[i:], pattern[j:])`, we use $$\text{dp(i, j)}$$ to handle those calls instead, saving us expensive string-building operations and allowing us to cache the intermediate results.


*Top-Down Variation*


*Bottom-Up Variation*



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: Let $$T, P$$ be the lengths of the text and the pattern respectively.  The work for every call to `dp(i, j)` for $$i=0, ... ,T$$; $$j=0, ... ,P$$ is done once, and it is $$O(1)$$ work.  Hence, the time complexity is $$O(TP)$$.

* Space Complexity:  The only memory we use is the $$O(TP)$$ boolean entries in our cache.  Hence, the space complexity is $$O(TP)$$.
