1004. Least Operators to Express Number | Algorithms | Hard | Math, Dynamic Programming

[TOC]

## Solution
---
#### Approach 1: Dynamic Programming

**Intuition**

First, we notice that we can consider blocks of multiplication and division separately.  Each block is a power of `x`: either `x / x`, `x`, `x * x`, `x * x * x`, `x * x * x * x` and so on.  (There is no point to write expressions like `x * x / x` because it uses strictly more operators.)

Let's think of the cost of a block as all the operators needed to express it, including the addition or subtraction operator in front of it.  For example, we can think of `x * x + x + x / x` as `(+ x * x) (+ x) (+ x / x)` for a cost of `2 + 1 + 2`, minus 1 for the leading `+` (so the total cost is `4`).

We can write the cost of writing a block that has value $$x^e$$: it is $$e$$, except when $$e = 0$$ it is 2.  We want the sum of the costs of all blocks minus 1.

Now, we have the reduced problem: we have the costs of writing all $$x^e$$ or $$-x^e$$, and we want to find the least cost to express the target.

Notice that modulo $$x$$, the only blocks that change the expression are $$x^0$$.  Let $$r_1 = \text{target} \pmod x$$.  So we must either subtract $$r_1$$ $$x^0$$'s, or add $$x-r_1$$ $$x^0$$'s.  This will form a new "remaining" target, $$\text{target}_2$$, that is divisible by $$x$$.

Then, modulo $$x^2$$, the only blocks that change the expression are $$x^1$$ and $$x^0$$.  However, since the new target is divisible by $$x$$, there is no point to use $$x^0$$, as we would have to use at least $$x$$ of them to do the same work as one use of $$x^1$$, which is a strictly higher cost.

Again, in a similar way, we have $$r_2 = \text{target}_2 \pmod {x^2}$$, and we must either subtract $$r_2 / x$$ $$x^1$$'s, or add $$x - r_2 / x$$ $$x^1$$'s.  This will form a new remaining target $$\text{target}_3$$, and so on.

As a concrete example, say `x = 5, target = 123`.  We either add `2` or subtract `3`.  This leaves us with a target of `120` or `125`.  If the target is `120`, we can either add `5` or subtract `20`, leaving us with a target of `100` or `125`.  If the target is `100`, we can either add `25` or subtract `100`, leaving us with a target of `125` or `0`.  If the target is `125`, we subtract `125`.

**Algorithm**

Let's calculate `dp(i, target)` using a top down `dp`.  Here, `i` will be the exponent of the block $$x^i$$ being considered, and `target` will be the remaining target, already divided by $$x^i$$.

From here, the recursion is straightforward: $$r = \text{target} \pmod x$$, and we either subtract $$r$$ blocks or add $$(x-r)$$ of them.  The base cases are easily deduced - see the code for more details.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(\log_{x} \text{target})$$.  We can prove that we only visit up to two states for each base-x digit of $$\text{target}$$.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(\log \text{target})$$.




---
Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
