1017. Odd Even Jump | Algorithms | Hard | Dynamic Programming, Stack, Ordered Map

[TOC]

## Solution
---
#### Approach 1: Monotonic Stack

**Intuition**

First, we notice that where you jump to is determined only by the state of your current index and the jump number parity.

For each state, there is exactly one state you could jump to (or you can't jump.)  If we somehow knew these jumps, we could solve the problem by a simple traversal.

So the problem reduces to solving this question: for some index `i` during an odd numbered jump, what index do we jump to (if any)?  The question for even-numbered jumps is similar.

**Algorithm**

Let's figure out where index `i` jumps to, assuming this is an odd-numbered jump.

Let's consider each value of `A` in order from smallest to largest.  When we consider a value `A[j] = v`, we search the values we have already processed (which are `<= v`) from largest to smallest.  If we find that we have already processed some value `v0 = A[i]` with `i < j`, then we know `i` jumps to `j`.

Naively this is a little slow, but we can speed this up with a common trick for harder problems: a monotonic stack.  (For another example of this technique, please see the solution to this problem: [(Article - Sum of Subarray Minimums)](https://leetcode.com/articles/sum-of-subarray-minimums/))

Let's store the indices `i` of the processed values `v0 = A[i]` in a stack, and maintain the invariant that this is monotone decreasing.  When we add a new index `j`, we pop all the smaller indices `i < j` from the stack, which all jump to `j`.

Afterwards, we know `oddnext[i]`, the index where `i` jumps to if this is an odd numbered jump.  Similarly, we know `evennext[i]`.  We can use this information to quickly build out all reachable states using dynamic programming.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N \log N)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `A`.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(N)$$.




---
#### Approach 2: Tree Map

**Intuition**

As in *Approach 1*, the problem reduces to solving this question: for some index `i` during an odd numbered jump, what index do we jump to (if any)?

**Algorithm**

We can use a `TreeMap`, which is an excellent structure for maintaining sorted data.  Our map `vals` will map values `v = A[i]` to indices `i`.

Iterating from `i = N-2` to `i = 0`, we have some value `v = A[i]` and we want to know what the next largest or next smallest value is.  The `TreeMap.lowerKey` and `TreeMap.higherKey` functions do this for us.

With this in mind, the rest of the solution is straightforward: we use dynamic programming to maintain `odd[i]` and `even[i]`: whether the state of being at index `i` on an odd or even numbered jump is possible to reach.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N \log N)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `A`.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(N)$$.




---
Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
