1025. Minimum Cost For Tickets | Algorithms | Medium | Dynamic Programming

[TOC]

## Solution
---
#### Approach 1: Dynamic Programming (Day Variant)

**Intuition and Algorithm**

For each day, if you don't have to travel today, then it's strictly better to wait to buy a pass.  If you have to travel today, you have up to 3 choices: you must buy either a 1-day, 7-day, or 30-day pass.

We can express those choices as a recursion and use dynamic programming.  Let's say `dp(i)` is the cost to fulfill your travel plan from day `i` to the end of the plan.  Then, if you have to travel today, your cost is:

$$
\text{dp}(i) = \min(\text{dp}(i+1) + \text{costs}[0], \text{dp}(i+7) + \text{costs}[1], \text{dp}(i+30) + \text{costs}[2])
$$



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(W)$$, where $$W = 365$$ is the maximum numbered day in your travel plan.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(W)$$.




---
#### Approach 2: Dynamic Programming (Window Variant)

**Intuition and Algorithm**

As in *Approach 1*, we only need to buy a travel pass on a day we intend to travel.

Now, let `dp(i)` be the cost to travel from day `days[i]` to the end of the plan.  If say, `j1` is the largest index such that `days[j1] < days[i] + 1`, `j7` is the largest index such that `days[j7] < days[i] + 7`, and `j30` is the largest index such that `days[j30] < days[i] + 30`, then we have:

$$
\text{dp}(i) = \min(\text{dp}(j1) + \text{costs}[0], \text{dp}(j7) + \text{costs}[1], \text{dp}(j30) + \text{costs}[2])
$$



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N)$$, where $$N$$ is the number of unique days in your travel plan.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(N)$$.




---
Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
