1034. Subarrays with K Different Integers | Algorithms | Hard | Hash Table, Two Pointers, Sliding Window

[TOC]

## Solution
---
#### Approach 1: Sliding Window

**Intuition**

For convenience, let's denote subarrays by tuples: `(i,j) = [A[i], A[i+1], ..., A[j]]`, and call a subarray *valid* if it has `K` different integers.

For each `j`, let's consider the set $$S_j$$ of all `i` such that the subarray `(i, j)` is valid.

Firstly, $$S_j$$ must be a contiguous interval.  If `i1 < i2 < i3`, `(i1,j)` and `(i3,j)` are valid, but `(i2,j)` is not valid, this is a contradiction because `(i2,j)` must contain more than `K` different elements [as `(i3,j)` contains `K`], but `(i1,j)` [which is a superset of `(i2,j)`] only contains `K` different integers.

So now let's write $$S_j$$ as intervals: $$S_j = [\text{left1}_j, \text{left2}_j]$$.

The second observation is that the endpoints of these intervals must be monotone increeasing - namely, $$\text{left1}_j$$ and $$\text{left2}_j$$ are monotone increasing.  With similar logic to the above, we could construct a proof of this fact, but the intuition is that after adding an extra element to our subarrays, they are already valid, or we need to shrink them a bit to keep them valid.

**Algorithm**

We'll maintain two sliding windows, corresponding to $$\text{left1}_j$$ and $$\text{left2}_j$$.  Each sliding window will be able to count how many different elements there are in the window, and add and remove elements in a queue-like fashion.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `A`.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(N)$$.




---
Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
