1037. Minimum Number of K Consecutive Bit Flips | Algorithms | Hard | Greedy, Sliding Window

[TOC]

## Solution
---
#### Approach 1: Greedy + Events

**Intuition**

If the leftmost element is a 0, we must flip the subarray starting at index 0.  Similarly, if the leftmost element is a 1, we should not flip the subarray starting at index 0.  This proves we can proceed in a greedy manner: after finding out whether we have to flip the first subarray (positions 0 to K-1) or not, we can consider the array with the first element (value 1) removed, and repeat this process.

We can do better.  Every time we flip a subarray `A[i], A[i+1], ..., A[i+K-1]`, we can consider this as two "events", one 'opening event' at position `i` that marks the start of the subarray, and one 'closing event' at position `i+K` that marks the end of the subarray.  Using these events, we always know how many overlapping flipped subarrays there are: its simply the number of opening events minus the number of closing events.

**Algorithm**

When we flip a subarray, let's call the set of indices we flipped an interval.  We'll keep track of `flip`, the number of overlapping intervals in our current position.  We only care about the value of `flip` modulo 2.

When we flip an interval starting at `i`, we create a hint for a closing event at `i+K` telling us to flip our writing state back.

Please see the inline comments for more details.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N)$$, where $$N$$ is length of `A`.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(N)$$.




---
Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
