134. Gas Station | Algorithms | Medium | Greedy

[TOC]

## Solution

---

#### Approach 1: One pass.

**Intuition**

The first idea is to check every single station :

- Choose the station as starting point.

- Perform the road trip and check how much gas we have in tank
at each station.

That means $$\mathcal{O}(N^2)$$ time complexity, and for sure one could
do better.

Let's notice two things.

> It's impossible to perform the road trip if `sum(gas) < sum(cost)`. 
In this situation the answer is `-1`. 



One could compute total amount of gas in the tank 
`total_tank = sum(gas) - sum(cost)` 
during the round trip, 
and then return `-1` if `total_tank < 0`.

> It's impossible to start at a station `i` if `gas[i] - cost[i] < 0`,
because then there is not enough gas in the tank to travel to 
`i + 1` station.
 


The second fact could be generalized. Let's introduce
`curr_tank` variable to track the current amount of gas 
in the tank. If at some station `curr_tank` is less
than `0`, that means that one couldn't reach this station.

Next step is to mark this station as a new starting point,
and reset `curr_tank` to zero since one starts with 
no gas in the tank.

**Algorithm**

Now the algorithm is straightforward :

1. Initiate `total_tank` and `curr_tank` as zero, and
choose station `0` as a starting station.

2. Iterate over all stations :
    
    - Update `total_tank` and `curr_tank` at each step,
    by adding `gas[i]` and subtracting `cost[i]`. 
    
    - If `curr_tank < 0` at `i + 1` station,
    make `i + 1` station a new starting point and
    reset `curr_tank = 0` to start with an empty tank.

3. Return `-1` if `total_tank < 0` and `starting station`
otherwise.

**Why this works**

Let's imagine the situation when `total_tank >= 0` and
the above algorithm returns $$N_s$$ as a starting station.

Algorithm directly ensures 
that it's possible to go from $$N_s$$ to the station $$0$$.
But what about the last part of the round trip
from the station $$0$$ to the station $$N_s$$ ?

> How one could ensure that it's possible to loop around to $$N_s$$ ?

Let's use here the [proof by contradiction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof_by_contradiction)
and assume that there is a station $$0 < k < N_s$$ such that 
one couldn't reach this station starting from $$N_s$$. 
 
The condition `total_tank >= 0` could be written as

$$
\sum_{i = 0}^{i = N}{\alpha_i} \ge 0    \qquad (1)
$$
where $$\alpha_i = \textrm{gas[i]} - \textrm{cost[i]}$$.

Let's split the sum on the right side 
by the starting station $$N_s$$
and unreachable station `k` : 

$$
\sum_{i = 0}^{i = k}{\alpha_i} + 
\sum_{i = k + 1}^{i = N_s - 1}{\alpha_i} +
\sum_{i = N_s}^{i = N}{\alpha_i} \ge 0  \qquad (2)
$$

The second term is negative by the algorithm definition - 
otherwise the starting station would be before $$N_s$$.
It could be equal to zero only in the case of $$k = N_s - 1$$.

$$
\sum_{i = k + 1}^{i = N_s - 1}{\alpha_i} \le 0  \qquad (3)
$$

Equations `(2)` and `(3)` together results in 

$$
\sum_{i = 0}^{i = k}{\alpha_i} +
\sum_{i = N_s}^{i = N}{\alpha_i} \ge 0  \qquad (4)
$$

At the same time the station $$k$$ is supposed to be unreachable
from $$N_s$$ that means 

$$
\sum_{i = N_s}^{i = N}{\alpha_i} +
\sum_{i = 0}^{i = k}{\alpha_i} < 0  \qquad (5)
$$

Eqs. `(4)` and `(5)` together result in a contradiction. 
Therefore, the initial assumption — 
that there is a station $$0 < k < N_s$$ such that 
one couldn't reach this station starting from $$N_s$$
— must be false.

Hence, one could do a round trip starting from $$N_s$$,
that makes $$N_s$$ to be an answer. 
The answer is unique according to the problem definition.

**Implementation**

!?!../Documents/134_LIS.json:1000,746!?!



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(N)$$ since there is only
one loop over all stations here.
 
* Space complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(1)$$ since it's a constant 
space solution. 

**Further reading**

There are numerous variations of gas problem, here are some examples :

[Find the cheapest path between two stations 
if at most Δ stops are allowed.](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002001901730203X) 

[Find the cheapest path between two stations 
if the vehicle has a given tank capacity.](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-540-75520-3_48)

Analysis written by @[liaison](https://leetcode.com/liaison/)
and @[andvary](https://leetcode.com/andvary/)
