142. Linked List Cycle II | Algorithms | Medium | Linked List, Two Pointers

[TOC]

#### Approach 1: Hash Table

**Intuition**

If we keep track of the nodes that we've seen already in a `Set`, we can
traverse the list and return the first duplicate node.

**Algorithm**

First, we allocate a `Set` to store `ListNode` references. Then, we traverse
the list, checking `visited` for containment of the current node. If the node
has already been seen, then it is necessarily the entrance to the cycle. If
any other node were the entrance to the cycle, then we would have already
returned that node instead. Otherwise, the `if` condition will never be
satisfied, and our function will return `null`.

The algorithm necessarily terminates for any list with a finite number of
nodes, as the domain of input lists can be divided into two categories:
cyclic and acyclic lists. An acyclic list resembles a `null`-terminated chain
of nodes, while a cyclic list can be thought of as an acyclic list with the
final `null` replaced by a reference to some previous node. If the `while`
loop terminates, we return `null`, as we have traversed the entire list
without encountering a duplicate reference. In this case, the list is
acyclic. For a cyclic list, the `while` loop will never terminate, but at
some point the `if` condition will be satisfied and cause the function to
return.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$O(n)$$

    For both cyclic and acyclic inputs, the algorithm must visit each node exactly once. This is transparently obvious for acyclic lists because the $$n$$th node points to `null`, causing the loop to terminate. For cyclic lists, the `if` condition will cause the function to return after visiting the $$n$$th node, as it points to some node that is already in `visited`. In both cases, the number of nodes visited is exactly $$n$$, so the runtime is linear in the number of nodes.

* Space complexity : $$O(n)$$

    For both cyclic and acyclic inputs, we will need to insert each node into the `Set` once. The only difference between the two cases is whether we discover that the "last" node points to `null` or a previously-visited node. Therefore, because the `Set` will contain $$n$$ distinct nodes, the memory footprint is linear in the number of nodes.



---
#### Approach 2: Floyd's Tortoise and Hare

**Intuition**

What happens when a fast runner (a hare) races a slow runner (a tortoise) on
a circular track? At some point, the fast runner will catch up to the slow
runner from behind.

**Algorithm**

Floyd's algorithm is separated into two distinct _phases_. In the first
phase, it determines whether a cycle is present in the list. If no cycle is
present, it returns `null` immediately, as it is impossible to find the
entrance to a nonexistant cycle. Otherwise, it uses the located "intersection
node" to find the entrance to the cycle.

*Phase 1*

Here, we initialize two pointers - the fast `hare` and the slow `tortoise`.
Then, until `hare` can no longer advance, we increment `tortoise` once and
`hare` twice.[^1] If, after advancing them, `hare` and `tortoise` point to
the same node, we return it. Otherwise, we continue. If the `while` loop
terminates without returning a node, then the list is acyclic, and we return
`null` to indicate as much.

To see why this works, consider the image below:


    


Here, the nodes in the cycle have been labelled from 0 to $$C-1$$, where
$$C$$ is the length of the cycle. The noncyclic nodes have been labelled from
$$-F$$ to -1, where $$F$$ is the number of nodes outside of the cycle. After
$$F$$ iterations, `tortoise` points to node 0 and `hare` points to some node
$$h$$, where $$F \equiv h \pmod C$$. This is because `hare` traverses $$2F$$
nodes over the course of $$F$$ iterations, exactly $$F$$ of which are in the
cycle. After $$C-h$$ more iterations, `tortoise` obviously points to node
$$C-h$$, but (less obviously) `hare` also points to the same node. To see why,
remember that `hare` traverses $$2(C-h)$$ from its starting position of $$h$$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    h + 2(C-h) &= 2C - h \\
                &\equiv C-h \pmod C
\end{aligned}
$$

Therefore, given that the list is cyclic, `hare` and `tortoise` will
eventually both point to the same node, known henceforce as the
_intersection_.

*Phase 2*

Given that phase 1 finds an intersection, phase 2 proceeds to find the node
that is the entrance to the cycle. To do so, we initialize two more pointers:
`ptr1`, which points to the head of the list, and `ptr2`, which points to
the intersection. Then, we advance each of them by 1 until they meet; the
node where they meet is the entrance to the cycle, so we return it.

Use the diagram below to help understand the proof of this approach's
correctness.


    


We can harness the fact that `hare` moves twice as quickly as `tortoise` to
assert that when `hare` and `tortoise` meet at node $$h$$, `hare` has
traversed twice as many nodes. Using this fact, we deduce the following:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    2 \cdot distance(tortoise) &= distance(hare) \\
                        2(F+a) &= F+a+b+a \\
                         2F+2a &= F+2a+b \\
                             F &= b \\
\end{aligned}
$$

Because $$F=b$$, pointers starting at nodes $$h$$ and $$0$$ will traverse the
same number of nodes before meeting.

To see the entire algorithm in action, check out the animation below:

!?!../Documents/142_Linked_List_Cycle_II.json:1280,720!?!



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$O(n)$$

    For cyclic lists, `hare` and `tortoise` will point to the same node after
    $$F+C-h$$ iterations, as demonstrated in the proof of correctness.
    $$F+C-h \leq F+C = n$$, so phase 1 runs in $$O(n)$$ time. Phase 2
    runs for $$F < n$$ iterations, so it also runs in $$O(n)$$ time.

    For acyclic lists, `hare` will reach the end of the list in roughly
    $$\dfrac{n}{2}$$ iterations, causing the function to return before phase
    2. Therefore, regardless of which category of list the algorithm
    receives, it runs in time linearly proportional to the number of nodes.

* Space complexity : $$O(1)$$

    Floyd's Tortoise and Hare algorithm allocates only pointers, so it runs
    with constant overall memory usage.


**Footnotes**

[^1]: It is sufficient to check only `hare` because it will always be ahead
of `tortoise` in an acyclic list.
