149. Max Points on a Line | Algorithms | Hard | Hash Table, Math

[TOC]

## Solution

---

#### Approach 1: Enumeration

Let's simplify the problem and search the maximum number of points
on a line passing through the point `i`. 

One could immediately notice that it's interesting to consider only
the next points `i + 1 .. N - 1` because the maximum number of points
containing, for example, the point `i - 2` was already found
during the search of the maximum number of points
on a line passing through the point `i - 2`. 



The idea is very simple : draw the lines 
passing through the point `i` and each of the next points.
Save these lines is a hash table with a counter `2` = two points
on this line.  
Let's imagine now that points `i < i + k < i + l` are on the same line.
Then drawing a line through `i` and `i + l` one would discover that this 
line is already tracked and hence one has to update a counter 
of points on this line `count++`.

>How to save a line? 

If the line is horizontal, i.e. `y = c`,
one could use this constant `c` as a line key in a hash table of horizontal lines.
Let's now take into account that all lines are passing through the same point `i`
(kudos do to [@FTWawe](https://leetcode.com/FTWawe/)).
Hence there is no need to keep `c` in a memory and one could just count
horizontal lines.

The other lines could be represented as `x = slope * y + c`. 
Again, one doesn't need in `c` because all lines are passing through the same point 
`i` and `slope` could be used as a line key. 

The equation for the line passing through two points `1` and `2` 
[could be written through their coordinates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Line_(geometry)#On_the_Cartesian_plane)
as

$$
\frac{x - x_1}{x_1 - x_2} = \frac{y - y_1}{y_1 - y_2}
$$

that for the representation $$x = slope \times y + c$$ means 

$$
slope = \frac{x_1 - x_2}{y_1 - y_2}
$$

Now everything is ready to write down the algorithm:

* Initiate the maximum number of points `max_count = 1`.
* Iterate over all points `i` from `0` to `N - 2`.
    * For each point `i` find a maximum number of points 
    `max_count_i`
    on a line passing through the point `i` :
        * Initiate the maximum number of points 
        on a line passing through the point `i` : `count = 1`.
        * Iterate over next points `j` from `i + 1` to `N - 1`.
            * If `j` is a duplicate of `i`, 
            update a number of duplicates for point `i`.
            * If not:
                * Save the line passing through the points `i` and `j`.
                * Update `count` at each step.
        * Return `max_count_i = count + duplicates`.
            
    * Update the result `max_count = max(max_count, max_count_i)`
        
!?!../Documents/149_LIS.json:1000,581!?!



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(N^2)$$ since one draws 
not more than `N - 1` lines passing through the point `0`,
not more than `N - 2` lines for the point `1`, and
the only one line for the point `N - 2`. That results in
`(N - 1) + (N - 2) + .. + 1 = N(N - 1)/2` operations, _i.e._ $$\mathcal{O}(N^2)$$ time complexity.
* Space complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(N)$$ to track down 
not more than `N - 1` lines.

Analysis written by @[liaison](https://leetcode.com/liaison/)
and @[andvary](https://leetcode.com/andvary/)
