17. Letter Combinations of a Phone Number | Algorithms | Medium | String, Backtracking

[TOC]

## Solution

---

#### Approach 1: Backtracking

[Backtracking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backtracking) 
is an algorithm for finding all
solutions by exploring all potential candidates.
If the solution candidate turns to be _not_ a solution 
(or at least not the _last_ one), 
backtracking algorithm discards it by making some changes 
on the previous step, *i.e.* _backtracks_ and then try again.

Here is a backtrack function `backtrack(combination, next_digits)`
which takes as arguments an ongoing letter combination 
and the next digits to check.

* If there is no more digits to check
that means that the current combination is done.
* If there are still digits to check :
    * Iterate over the letters mapping the next available digit.
        * Append the current letter to the current combination 
        `combination = combination + letter`.
        * Proceed to check next digits : 
        `backtrack(combination + letter, next_digits[1:])`.
        
!?!../Documents/17_LIS.json:1000,592!?!



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(3^N \times 4^M)$$
where `N` is the number of digits in the input that maps to  3 letters 
(*e.g.* `2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8`) and `M` is the number of digits in the input
that maps to 4 letters (*e.g.* `7, 9`),
and `N+M` is the total number digits in the input.
 
* Space complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(3^N \times 4^M)$$ since one has to keep
$$3^N \times 4^M$$ solutions.

Analysis written by @[liaison](https://leetcode.com/liaison/)
and @[andvary](https://leetcode.com/andvary/)
