179. Largest Number | Algorithms | Medium | Sort

[TOC]

#### Approach #1 Sorting via Custom Comparator [Accepted]

**Intuition**

To construct the largest number, we want to ensure that the most significant
digits are occupied by the largest digits.

**Algorithm**

First, we convert each integer to a string. Then, we sort the array of strings.

While it might be tempting to simply sort the numbers in descending order,
this causes problems for sets of numbers with the same leading digit. For
example, sorting the problem example in descending order would produce the
number $$9534303$$, while the correct answer can be achieved by transposing
the $$3$$ and the $$30$$. Therefore, for each pairwise comparison during the
sort, we compare the numbers achieved by concatenating the pair in both
orders. We can prove that this sorts into the proper order as follows: 

Assume that (without loss of generality), for some pair of integers $$a$$ and
$$b$$, our comparator dictates that $$a$$ should precede $$b$$ in sorted
order. This means that $$a\frown b > b\frown a$$ (where $$\frown$$ represents
concatenation). For the sort to produce an incorrect ordering, there must be
some $$c$$ for which $$b$$ precedes $$c$$ and $$c$$ precedes $$a$$. This is a
contradiction because $$a\frown b > b\frown a$$ and $$b\frown c > c\frown b$$
implies $$a\frown c > c\frown a$$. In other words, our custom comparator
preserves transitivity, so the sort is correct.

Once the array is sorted, the most "signficant" number will be at the front.
There is a minor edge case that comes up when the array consists of only
zeroes, so if the most significant number is $$0$$, we can simply return
$$0$$. Otherwise, we build a string out of the sorted array and return it.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(nlgn)$$

    Although we are doing extra work in our comparator, it is only by a
    constant factor. Therefore, the overall runtime is dominated by the
    complexity of `sort`, which is $$\mathcal{O}(nlgn)$$ in Python and Java.

* Space complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(n)$$

    Here, we allocate $$\mathcal{O}(n)$$ additional space to store the copy of `nums`.
    Although we could do that work in place (if we decide that it is okay to
    modify `nums`), we must allocate $$\mathcal{O}(n)$$ space for the final return
    string. Therefore, the overall memory footprint is linear in the length
    of `nums`.

---

Analysis and solutions written by: [@emptyset](https://leetcode.com/emptyset)
