21. Merge Two Sorted Lists | Algorithms | Easy | Linked List

[TOC]

#### Approach 1: Recursion

**Intuition**

We can recursively define the result of a `merge` operation on two lists as
the following (avoiding the corner case logic surrounding empty lists):

$$
\left\{
\begin{array}{ll}
      list1[0] + merge(list1[1:], list2) & list1[0] < list2[0] \\
      list2[0] + merge(list1, list2[1:]) & otherwise
\end{array}
\right.
$$

Namely, the smaller of the two lists' heads plus the result of a `merge` on
the rest of the elements.

**Algorithm**

We model the above recurrence directly, first accounting for edge cases.
Specifically, if either of `l1` or `l2` is initially `null`, there is no
merge to perform, so we simply return the non-`null` list. Otherwise, we
determine which of `l1` and `l2` has a smaller head, and recursively set the
`next` value for that head to the next merge result. Given that both lists
are `null`-terminated, the recursion will eventually terminate.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$O(n + m)$$

    Because each recursive call increments the pointer to `l1` or `l2` by one (approaching the dangling `null` at the end of each list), there will be exactly one call to `mergeTwoLists` per element in each list. Therefore, the time complexity is linear in the combined size of the lists.

* Space complexity : $$O(n + m)$$

    The first call to `mergeTwoLists` does not return until the ends of both `l1` and `l2` have been reached, so $$n + m$$ stack frames consume $$O(n + m)$$ space.



---

#### Approach 2: Iteration

**Intuition**

We can achieve the same idea via iteration by assuming that `l1` is entirely
less than `l2` and processing the elements one-by-one, inserting elements of
`l2` in the necessary places in `l1`.

**Algorithm**

First, we set up a false "`prehead`" node that allows us to easily return the
head of the merged list later. We also maintain a `prev` pointer, which
points to the current node for which we are considering adjusting its `next`
pointer. Then, we do the following until at least one of `l1` and `l2` points
to `null`: if the value at `l1` is less than or equal to the value at `l2`,
then we connect `l1` to the previous node and increment `l1`. Otherwise, we
do the same, but for `l2`. Then, regardless of which list we connected, we
increment `prev` to keep it one step behind one of our list heads.

After the loop terminates, at most one of `l1` and `l2` is non-`null`.
Therefore (because the input lists were in sorted order), if either list is
non-`null`, it contains only elements greater than all of the
previously-merged elements. This means that we can simply connect the
non-`null` list to the merged list and return it.

To see this in action on an example, check out the animation below:

!?!../Documents/21_Merge_Two_Sorted_Lists.json:1280,720!?!



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$O(n + m)$$

    Because exactly one of `l1` and `l2` is incremented on each loop
    iteration, the `while` loop runs for a number of iterations equal to the
    sum of the lengths of the two lists. All other work is constant, so the
    overall complexity is linear.

* Space complexity : $$O(1)$$

    The iterative approach only allocates a few pointers, so it has a
    constant overall memory footprint.
