257. Binary Tree Paths | Algorithms | Easy | Tree, Depth-first Search

[TOC]

## Solution

---

#### Binary tree definition

First of all, here is the definition of the ```TreeNode``` which we would use
in the following implementation.






---
#### Approach 1: Recursion

The most intuitive way is to use a recursion here.
One is going through the tree 
by considering at each step the node itself and its children.
If node *is not* a leaf, one extends the current path by a node value and
calls recursively the path construction for its children.
If node *is* a leaf, one closes the current path and adds it into 
the list of paths.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : we visit each node exactly once, 
thus the time complexity is $$\mathcal{O}(N)$$,
where $$N$$ is the number of nodes.
* Space complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(N)$$. Here we use the space for a stack call and for a 
`paths` list to store the answer. `paths` contains as many elements as leafs in the tree and 
hence couldn't be larger than $$\log N$$ for the trees containing more than one element. 
Hence the space complexity is determined by a stack call.
In the worst case, when the tree is completely unbalanced,
*e.g.* each node has only one child node, the recursion call would occur
$$N$$ times (the height of the tree), therefore the storage to keep the call stack would be $$\mathcal{O}(N)$$.
But in the best case (the tree is balanced), the height of the tree would be $$\log(N)$$.
Therefore, the space complexity in this case would be $$\mathcal{O}(\log(N))$$.




---
#### Approach 2: Iterations

The approach above could be rewritten with the help of iterations. 
This way we initiate the stack by a root node and then at each step
we pop out one node and its path.
If the poped node *is* a leaf, one update the list of all paths.
If not, one pushes its child nodes and
corresponding paths into stack till all nodes are checked.


!?!../Documents/257_LIS.json:1000,491!?!



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(N)$$ since each node is visited exactly once. 
* Space complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(N)$$ as we could keep up to the entire tree.

Analysis written by @[liaison](https://leetcode.com/liaison/)
and @[andvary](https://leetcode.com/andvary/)
