264. Ugly Number II | Algorithms | Medium | Math, Dynamic Programming, Heap

[TOC]

## Solution

--- 

#### Two levels of optimisation

Let's imagine that the problem is solved somehow for the number n
and we've put the solution directly in `nthUglyNumber` method
of the `Solution` class.

Now let's check the context: there are 596 test cases, 
for the most of them n is larger than 50, 
and n is known to be smaller than 1691. 

Hence instead of computing $$596 \times 50 = 29800$$ ugly numbers in total, 
one could precompute all 1690 numbers, and significantly speed up
the submission. 

> How to precompute? Use another class `Ugly` with all 
computations in the constructor
and then declare `Ugly` instance as a static variable of `Solution` class. 

Now let's consider two different approaches to perform the 
preliminary computations. 
 



---
#### Approach 1: Heap

**Intuition**

Let's start from the heap which contains just one number: 1.  
To compute next ugly numbers, pop 1 from the heap and
push instead three numbers: $$1 \times 2$$, $$1 \times 3$$,
and $$1 \times 5$$. 

Now the smallest number in the heap is 2. 
To compute next ugly numbers, pop 2 from the heap and
push instead three numbers: $$2 \times 2$$, $$2 \times 3$$,
and $$2 \times 5$$. 

> One could continue like this to compute first 1690 ugly numbers. 
At each step, pop the smallest ugly number k from the heap,
and push instead three ugly numbers: $$k \times 2$$, $$k \times 3$$,
and $$k \times 5$$.

!?!../Documents/264_SEC.json:1000,394!?!

**Algorithm**

- Precompute 1690 ugly numbers:

    - Initiate array of precomputed ugly numbers `nums`, heap `heap`
    and hashset `seen` to track all elements already pushed in the heap
    in order to avoid duplicates.
    
    - Make a loop of 1690 steps. At each step:
    
        - Pop the smallest element `k` out of heap and add it into the 
        array of precomputed ugly numbers.
        
        - Push `2k`, `3k` and `5k` in the heap if they are not yet 
        in the hashset. Update the hashset of seen ugly numbers as well.
        
- Retrieve needed ugly number from the array of precomputed numbers.

**Implementation**



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(1)$$ to retrieve preliminary 
computed ugly number, and more than $$12 \times 10^6$$ 
operations for preliminary computations. 
Let's estimate the number of operations needed for the preliminary 
computations. `For` loop here has 1690 steps, and each step performs
1 pop, not more than 3 pushes and 3 `contains / in` operations 
for the hashset. Pop and push have logarithmic time complexity 
and hence much cheaper than the linear search, so let's estimate only the
last term. This arithmetic progression is easy to estimate:

    $$
    1 + 2 + 3 + ... + 1690 \times 3 = \frac{(1 + 1690 \times 3) \times 1690 \times 3}{2} > 4.5 \times 1690^2
    $$


* Space complexity : constant space to keep an array of 1690 ugly numbers,
the heap of not more than $$1690 \times 2$$ elements and the hashset of
not more than $$1690 \times 3$$ elements.
 



---
#### Approach 2: Dynamic Programming

**Intuition**

Preliminary computations in Approach 1 are quite heavy, and could 
be optimised with dynamic programming. 

Let's start from the array of ugly numbers which contains just one
number - 1. Let's use three pointers $$i_2$$, $$i_3$$ and $$i_5$$,
to mark the last ugly number which was multiplied by 2, 3 and 5, 
correspondingly. 

The algorithm is straightforward: choose 
the smallest ugly number among $$2 \times \textrm{nums}[i_2]$$, $$3 \times \textrm{nums}[i_3]$$,
and $$5 \times \textrm{nums}[i_5]$$ and add it into the array. 
Move the corresponding pointer by one step. Repeat till you'll have
1690 ugly numbers.

!?!../Documents/264_LIS.json:1000,394!?!

**Algorithm**

- Precompute 1690 ugly numbers:

    - Initiate array of precomputed ugly numbers `nums` and three 
    pointers `i2`, `i3` and `i5` to track the index of the 
    last ugly number used to produce the next ones. 
    
    - Make a loop of 1690 steps. At each step:
    
        - Choose the smallest number among `nums[i2] * 2`, `nums[i3] * 3`,
        and `nums[i5] * 5` and add it into `nums`.
        
        - Move by one the pointer which corresponds to the "ancestor" 
        of the added number.     
        
- Retrieve needed ugly number from the array of precomputed numbers.

**Implementation**



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(1)$$ to retrieve preliminary 
computed ugly number, and about $$1690 \times 5 = 8450$$ 
operations for preliminary computations. 

* Space complexity : constant space to keep an array of 1690 ugly numbers.
    
Analysis written by @[liaison](https://leetcode.com/liaison/)
and @[andvary](https://leetcode.com/andvary/)
