297. Serialize and Deserialize Binary Tree | Algorithms | Hard | Tree, Design

[TOC]

## Solution

---

#### Approach 1: Depth First Search (DFS)


**Intuition**



The **serialization** of a `Binary Search Tree` is essentially to encode
its values and more importantly its structure. 
One can traverse the tree to accomplish the above task.
And it is well know that we have two general strategies to do so:

- *Breadth First Search* (`BFS`)

    We scan through the tree level by level, following the order of height,
    from top to bottom. The nodes on higher level would be visited before
    the ones with lower levels.
     
- *Depth First Search* (`DFS`)

    In this strategy, we adopt the `depth` as the priority, so that one
    would start from a root and reach all the way down to certain leaf,
    and then back to root to reach another branch.

    The DFS strategy can further be distinguished as
    `preorder`, `inorder`, and `postorder` depending on the relative order
    among the root node, left node and right node.
    
In this task, however, the `DFS` strategy is more adapted for our needs,
since the linkage among the adjacent nodes is naturally encoded in the order,
which is rather helpful for the later task of **deserialization**. 

Therefore, in this solution, we demonstrate an example with the `preorder` DFS strategy.
One can check out more tutorial about `Binary Search Tree` on 
the [LeetCode Explore](https://leetcode.com/explore/learn/card/introduction-to-data-structure-binary-search-tree/).

**Algorithm**

First of all, here is the definition of the ```TreeNode``` which we would use
in the following implementation.





The preorder DFS traverse follows *recursively* the order of  
`root -> left subtree -> right subtree`.

As an example, let's serialize the following tree.
Note that serialization contains information about the node values
as well as the information about the tree structure.



!?!../Documents/297_LIS.json:1000,622!?!


We start from the root, node `1`, the serialization string is ```1,```.
Then we jump to its left subtree with the root node `2`, and the serialization string becomes ```1,2,```.
Now starting from node `2`, 
we visit its left node `3` (```1,2,3,None,None,```) 
and right node `4` (```1,2,3,None,None,4,None,None```) sequentially.
Note that ```None,None,``` appears for each leaf to mark the absence of left and right child node, 
this is how we save the tree structure during the serialization.
And finally, we get back to the root node `1` and visit its right subtree
which happens to be a leaf node `5`. Finally, the serialization string is done
as ```1,2,3,None,None,4,None,None,5,None,None,```.




Now let's deserialize the serialization string constructed above ```1,2,3,None,None,4,None,None,5,None,None,```.
It goes along the string, initiate the node value and 
then calls itself to construct its left and right child nodes. 



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : in both serialization and deserialization functions,
 we visit each node exactly once, thus the time complexity is $$O(N)$$,
 where $$N$$ is the number of nodes, *i.e.* the size of tree. 

* Space complexity : in both serialization and deserialization functions,
 we keep the entire tree, either at the beginning or at the end,
 therefore, the space complexity is $$O(N)$$. 
 
The solutions with BFS or other DFS strategies normally will have the same
time and space complexity.
 
**Further Space Optimization**

In the above solution, we store the node value and 
the references to ```None``` child nodes, 
which means $$N \cdot V + 2N$$ complexity, 
where $$V$$ is the size of value. 
That is called *natural serialization*, and has was implemented above.

The $$N \cdot V$$ component here is the encoding of values, can't be optimized further,
but there is a way to reduce $$2N$$ part 
which is the encoding of the tree structure.

The number of unique binary tree structures that can be 
constructed using `n` nodes is $$C(n)$$, where $$C(n)$$ is the `nth` Catalan
number. Please refer to [this article](https://leetcode.com/articles/unique-binary-search-trees/) for more information.

There are $$C(n)$$ possible structural configurations of 
a binary tree with n nodes, so the largest index value 
that we might need to store is $$C(n) - 1$$.
That means storing the index value could require up to 
1 bit for $$n \leq 2$$, or $$\lceil log_2(C(n) - 1) \rceil$$ bits for $$n > 2$$.

In this way one could reduce the encoding of the tree structure by $$\log N$$.
More precisely, the [Catalan numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catalan_number) grow as
$$C(n) \sim \frac{4^n}{n^{3/2}\sqrt{\pi}}$$ and hence the theoretical minimum of storage
 for the tree structure that could be achieved
is $$log(C(n)) \sim 2n - \frac{3}{2}\log(n) - \frac{1}{2}\log(\pi)$$

Analysis written by @[liaison](https://leetcode.com/liaison/)
and @[andvary](https://leetcode.com/andvary/)
