33. Search in Rotated Sorted Array | Algorithms | Medium | Array, Binary Search

[TOC]

## Solution

---
   
#### Approach 1: Binary search

The problem is to implement a search in $$\mathcal{O}(\log(N))$$ time
that gives an idea to use a binary search.

The algorithm is quite straightforward : 

* Find a rotation index `rotation_index`, 
_i.e._ index of the smallest element in the array.
Binary search works just perfect here.

* `rotation_index` splits array in two parts. 
Compare `nums[0]` and `target` 
to identify in which part one has to look for `target`.

* Perform a binary search in the chosen part of the array. 
        
!?!../Documents/33_LIS.json:1000,510!?!



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(\log(N))$$. 
* Space complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(1)$$. 
 



---
#### Approach 2: One pass 

Instead of two passes, all this could be done in one pass.
Kudos for this solution go to 
@[haoyangfan](https://leetcode.com/haoyangfan/).

**Algorithm**

- Initiate start to be equal to 0, and end to be equal to `n - 1`.

- Perform standard binary search. While `start <= end`:

    - Take an index in the middle `mid` as a pivot.
    
    - If `nums[mid] == target`, the job is done, return `mid`.
    
    - Now there could be two situations:
    
        - Pivot element is larger than the first element in the 
        array, i.e. the part of array from the first element to 
        the pivot one is non-rotated.
        
            - If the target is in that non-rotated part as well: 
            go left: `end = mid - 1`.
            
            - Otherwise: go right: `start = mid + 1`.
            
        - Pivot element is smaller than the first element of the
        array, i.e. the rotation index is somewhere between `0` 
        and `mid`. That means that the part of array 
        from the pivot element to the last one is non-rotated.
        
            - If target is in that non-rotated part as well: 
            go right: `end = mid + 1`.
            
            - Otherwise: go left: `start = mid - 1`.
            
- We're here because the target is not found. Return -1.
            

**Implementation**



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(\log(N))$$. 
* Space complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(1)$$. 

Analysis written by @[liaison](https://leetcode.com/liaison/)
and @[andvary](https://leetcode.com/andvary/)
