410. Split Array Largest Sum | Algorithms | Hard | Binary Search, Dynamic Programming

[TOC]

#### Approach #1 Brute Force [Time Limit Exceeded]

**Intuition**

Check all possible splitting plans to find the minimum largest value for subarrays.

**Algorithm**

We can use depth-first search to generate all possible splitting plan. For each element in the array, we can choose to append it to the previous subarray or start a new subarray starting with that element (if the number of subarrays does not exceed `m`). The sum of the current subarray can be updated at the same time.





**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$O(n^m)$$. To split `n` elements into `m` parts, we can have $$\binom{n - 1}{m - 1}$$ different solutions. This is equivalent to $$ n ^ m$$.

* Space complexity : $$O(n)$$. We only need the space to store the array.

---
#### Approach #2 Dynamic Programming [Accepted]

**Intuition**

The problem satisfies the non-aftereffect property. We can try to use dynamic programming to solve it.

The non-aftereffect property means, once the state of a certain stage is determined, it is not affected by the state in the future. In this problem, if we get the largest subarray sum for splitting `nums[0..i]` into `j` parts, this value will not be affected by how we split the remaining part of `nums`.

To know more about non-aftereffect property, this link may be helpful : 

**Algorithm**

Let's define `f[i][j]` to be the minimum largest subarray sum for splitting `nums[0..i]` into `j` parts.

Consider the `j`th subarray. We can split the array from a smaller index `k` to `i` to form it. Thus `f[i][j]` can be derived from `max(f[k][j - 1], nums[k + 1] +  ... + nums[i])`. For all valid index `k`, `f[i][j]` should choose the minimum value of the above formula.

The final answer should be `f[n][m]`, where `n` is the size of the array.

For corner situations, all the invalid `f[i][j]` should be assigned with `INFINITY`, and `f[0][0]` should be initialized with `0`.




**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$O(n^2 * m)$$. The total number of states is $$O(n * m)$$. To compute each state `f[i][j]`, we need to go through the whole array to find the optimum `k`. This requires another $$O(n)$$ loop. So the total time complexity is $$O(n ^ 2 * m)$$.

* Space complexity : $$O(n * m)$$. The space complexity is equivalent to the number of states, which is $$O(n * m)$$.

---
#### Approach #3 Binary Search + Greedy [Accepted]

**Intuition**

We can easily find a property for the answer:
> If we can find a splitting method that ensures the maximum largest subarray sum will not exceed a value  `x`, then we can also find a splitting method that ensures the maximum largest subarray sum will not exceed any value `y` that is greater than `x`.

Lets define this property as `F(x)` for the value `x`. `F(x)` is true means we can find a splitting method that ensures the maximum largest subarray sum will not exceed `x`.

From the discussion above, we can find out that for `x` ranging from `-INFINITY` to `INFINITY`, `F(x)` will start with false, then from a specific value `x0`, `F(x)` will turn to true and stay true forever.

 Obviously, the specific value `x0` is our answer.

**Algorithm**

We can use Binary search to find the value `x0`. Keeping a value `mid = (left + right) / 2`. If `F(mid)` is false, then we will search the range `[mid + 1, right]`; If `F(mid)` is true, then we will search `[left, mid - 1]`.

For a given `x`, we can get the answer of `F(x)` using a greedy approach. Using an accumulator `sum` to store the sum of the current processing subarray and a counter `cnt` to count the number of existing subarrays. We will process the elements in the array one by one. For each element `num`, if `sum + num <= x`, it means we can add `num` to the current subarray without exceeding the limit. Otherwise, we need to make a cut here, start a new subarray with the current element `num`. This leads to an increment in the number of subarrays.

After we have finished the whole process, we need to compare the value `cnt` to the size limit of subarrays `m`. If `cnt <= m`, it means we can find a splitting method that ensures the maximum largest subarray sum will not exceed `x`. Otherwise, `F(x)` should be false.


**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$O(n * log(sum \ of \ array))$$. The binary search costs $$O(log(sum \ of \ array))$$, where `sum of array` is the sum of elements in `nums`. For each computation of `F(x)`, the time complexity is $$O(n)$$ since we only need to go through the whole array.

* Space complexity : $$O(n)$$. Same as the Brute Force approach.  We only need the space to store the array.
