496. Next Greater Element I | Algorithms | Easy | Stack

[TOC]

## Summary

You are given two arrays (without duplicates) $$findNums$$ and $$nums$$ where $$findNums$$’s elements are subset of $$nums$$.Find all the
next greater
numbers for $$findNums$$'s elements in the corresponding places of $$nums$$.

The Next Greater Number of a number x in $$findNums$$ is the first greater number to its right in $$nums$$. If it does not exist, output -1 for
this number.

## Solution

---
#### Approach #1 Brute Force [Accepted]

 In this method, we pick up every element of the $$findNums$$ array(say $$findNums[i]$$) and then search for its own occurence in the $$nums$$ array(which is
 indicated by setting $$found$$ to True). After this, we look linearly for a number in $$nums$$ which is greater than $$findNums[i]$$, which
 is also added to the $$res$$ array to be returned. If no such element is found, we put a $$\text{-1}$$ at the corresponding location.

 


 **Complexity Analysis**

 * Time complexity : $$O(m*n)$$. The complete $$nums$$ array(of size $$n$$) needs to be scanned for all the $$m$$ elements of $$findNums$$ in
 the worst case.
 * Space complexity : $$O(m)$$. $$res$$ array of size $$m$$ is used, where $$m$$ is the length of $$findNums$$ array.

---

#### Approach #2 Better Brute Force [Accepted]

Instead of searching for the occurence of $$findNums[i]$$ linearly in the $$nums$$ array, we can make use of a hashmap $$hash$$ to store
the elements of $$nums$$ in the form of $$(element, index)$$. By doing this, we can find $$findNums[i]$$'s index in $$nums$$ array directly and
then continue to search for the next larger element in a linear fashion.

 


 **Complexity Analysis**

 * Time complexity : $$O(m*n)$$. The whole $$nums$$ array, of length $$n$$ needs to be scanned for all the $$m$$ elements of $$finalNums$$ in the worst case.

 * Space complexity : $$O(m)$$. $$res$$ array of size $$m$$ is used. A hashmap $$hash$$ of size $$m$$ is used, where $$m$$ refers to the
 length of the $$findNums$$ array.

---

#### Approach #3 Using Stack [Accepted]

In this approach, we make use of pre-processing first so as to make the results easily available later on.
 We make use of a stack($$stack$$) and a hashmap($$map$$). $$map$$ is used to store the result for every posssible number in $$nums$$ in
the form of $$(element, next\_greater\_element)$$. Now, we look at how to make entries in $$map$$.

We iterate over the $$nums$$ array
from the left to right. We push every element $$nums[i]$$ on the stack if it is less than the previous element on the top of the stack
($$stack[top]$$). No entry is made in $$map$$ for such $$nums[i]'s$$ right now. This happens because
the $$nums[i]'s$$ encountered so far are coming in a descending order.

If we encounter an element $$nums[i]$$ such that $$nums[i] > stack[top]$$, we keep on popping all the elements
from $$stack[top]$$ until we encounter $$stack[k]$$ such that $$stack[k] ≤ nums[i]$$. For every element popped out of the stack
$$stack[j]$$, we put the popped element along with its next greater number(result) into the hashmap $$map$$, in the form
$$(stack[j], nums[i])$$ . Now, it is obvious that the
next greater element for all elements $$stack[j]$$, such that $$k < j ≤ top$$ is $$nums[i]$$(since this larger element caused all the
$$stack[j]$$'s to be popped out). We stop popping the elements at $$stack[k]$$ because this $$nums[i]$$ can't act as the next greater element
for the next elements on the stack.

Thus, an element is popped out of the stack whenever a next greater element is found for it. Thus, the elements remaining in the stack are the
ones for which no next greater element exists in the $$nums$$ array. Thus, at the end of the iteration over $$nums$$, we pop the remaining
elements from the $$stack$$ and put their entries in $$hash$$ with a $$\text{-1}$$ as their corresponding results.

Then, we can simply iterate over the $$findNums$$ array to find the corresponding results from $$map$$ directlhy.

The following animation makes the method clear:

!?!../Documents/496_Next_Greater_Element_I.json:1280,720!?!



 


 **Complexity Analysis**

 * Time complexity : $$O(m+n)$$. The entire $$nums$$ array(of size $$n$$) is scanned only once. The stack's $$n$$ elements are popped
 only once. The $$findNums$$ array is also scanned only once.

 * Space complexity : $$O(m+n)$$. $$stack$$ and $$map$$ of size $$n$$ is used. $$res$$ array of size $$m$$ is used, where $$n$$ refers to the
 length of the $$nums$$ array and $$m$$ refers to the length of the $$findNums$$ array.

---
Analysis written by: [@vinod23](https://leetcode.com/vinod23)
