51. N-Queens | Algorithms | Hard | Backtracking

[TOC]

## Solution

---

#### Intuition

The first idea is to use brute-force 
that means to generate all possible ways to put `N` queens on the board,
and then check them to keep only the combinations 
with no queen under attack. 
That means $$\mathcal{O}(N^N)$$ time complexity
and hence we're forced to think further how to optimize.

There are two programming conceptions here which could
help.

> The first one is called _constrained programming_. 

That basically means
to put restrictions after each queen placement. One puts a queen on the 
board and that immediately excludes one column, one row and 
two diagonals for the further queens placement. That propagates 
_constraints_ and helps to reduce the number of combinations to consider.



> The second one called _backtracking_. 

Let's imagine that one 
puts several queens on the board so that they don't attack each other. 
But the combination chosen is not the optimal one and there is no place
for the next queen. What to do? _To backtrack_. That means to come back,
to change the position of the previously placed queen and try 
to proceed again. If that would not work either, _backtrack_ again.






---
#### Approach 1: Backtracking

Before to construct the algorithm, 
let's figure out two tips that could
help.

> There could be the only one queen in a row and the only one queen
in a column.

That means that there is no need to consider all squares on the 
board. One could just iterate over the columns.

> For all "hill" diagonals `row + column = const`, 
and for all "dale" diagonals `row - column = const`.  

That would allow us to mark the diagonals which are already under 
attack and to check if a given square `(row, column)` is under attack.



Now everything is ready to write down the backtrack function 
`backtrack(row = 0)`.

* Start from the first `row = 0`. 
* Iterate over the columns and try to put a queen in each `column`.

    * If square `(row, column)` is not under attack
        
        * Place the queen in `(row, column)` square.
        * Exclude one row, one column and two diagonals from further 
        consideration.
        * If all rows are filled up `row == N`
            * That means that we find out one more solution.
        * Else
            * Proceed to place further queens `backtrack(row + 1)`.
        * Now backtrack : remove the queen from `(row, column)` square.
        
Here is a straightforward implementation of the above algorithm.  

!?!../Documents/51_LIS.json:1000,705!?!



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(N!)$$. There is `N` possibilities to put 
the first queen, not more than `N (N - 2)` to put the second one,
not more than `N(N - 2)(N - 4)` for the third one etc. In total that
results in $$\mathcal{O}(N!)$$ time complexity.
* Space complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(N)$$ to keep an information about 
diagonals and rows. 

Analysis written by @[liaison](https://leetcode.com/liaison/)
and @[andvary](https://leetcode.com/andvary/)
