521. Longest Uncommon Subsequence I  | Algorithms | Easy | String

[TOC]

## Solution

---
#### Approach #1 Brute Force [Time Limit Exceeded]

In the brute force approach we will generate all the possible $$2^n$$ subsequences of both the strings and store their number of occurences in a hashmap.
Longest subsequence whose frequency is equal to $$1$$ will be the required subsequence.
And, if it is not found we will return $$-1$$.




**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$O(2^x+2^y)$$. where $$x$$ and $$y$$ are the lengths of strings $$a$$ and $$b$$ respectively . Number of subsequences will be $$2^x+2^y$$.
* Space complexity : $$O(2^x+2^y)$$. $$2^x+2^y$$ subsequences will be generated.

---
#### Approach #2 Simple Solution[Accepted]

**Algorithm**

Simple analysis of this problem can lead to an easy solution.

These three cases are possible with string $$a$$ and $$b$$:-

* $$a=b$$. If both the strings are identical, it is obvious that no subsequence will be uncommon. Hence, return -1.

* $$length(a)=length(b)$$ and $$a \ne b$$. Example: $$abc$$ and $$abd$$. In this case we can consider any string i.e. $$abc$$ or $$abd$$ as a required subsequence, as out of these two strings one string will never be a subsequence of other string. Hence, return $$length(a)$$ or $$length(b)$$.

* $$length(a) \ne length(b)$$. Example $$abcd$$ and $$abc$$. In this case we can consider bigger string as a required subsequence because bigger string can't be a subsequence of smaller string. Hence, return $$max(length(a),length(b))$$.




**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$O(min(x,y))$$. where $$x$$ and $$y$$ are the lengths of strings $$a$$ and $$b$$ respectively. Here equals method will take $$min(x,y)$$ time .

* Space complexity : $$O(1)$$. No extra space required.

---


Analysis written by: [@vinod23](https://leetcode.com/vinod23)
