544. Output Contest Matches | Algorithms | Medium | String, Recursion

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Simulation [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Let `team[i]` be the correct team string of the `i`-th strongest team for that round.  We will maintain these correctly as the rounds progress.

**Algorithm**

In each round, the `i`-th team becomes `"(" + team[i] + "," + team[n-1-i] + ")"`, and then there are half as many teams.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N \log N)$$.  Each of $$O(\log N)$$ rounds performs $$O(N)$$ work.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N \log N)$$.

---
#### Approach #2: Linear Write [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Let's try to solve the problem in linear time.  We can treat this problem as two separate problems: outputting the correct sequence of parentheses and commas, and outputting the correct team number.  With a little effort, one can be convinced that a linear time solution probably exists.

**Algorithm**

Let's focus on the parentheses first.  We can use recursion to find the answer.  For example, when `N = 8`, let `R = log_2(N) = 3` be the number of rounds.  The parentheses and commas look like this:

```python
(((x,x),(x,x)),((x,x),(x,x)))
```

But this is just recursively
```python
"(" + (sequence for R = 2) + "," + (sequence for R = 2) + ")"
= "(" + "((x,x),(x,x))" + "," + "((x,x),(x,x))" + ")"
```

Now let's look at the team numbers.  For `N = 16`, the team numbers are:

`team = [1, 16, 8, 9, 4, 13, 5, 12, 2, 15, 7, 10, 3, 14, 6, 11]`

One thing we might notice is that adjacent numbers sum to `17`.  More specifically, indices that are 0 and 1 (mod 2) sum to `17`.  Also, indices 0 and 2 (mod 4) sum to `9`, indices 0 and 4 (mod 8) sum to `5`, and so on.

The pattern in general is: indices `0` and `2**r` (mod `2**(r+1)`) sum to `N * 2**-r + 1`.

If we want to find the next `team[i]`, then the lowest bit of `i` will help determine it's lower neighbor.  For example, `team[12] = team[0b1100]` has lower bit `w = 4 = 0b100`, so `12` has lower neighbor `12 - w = 8`, and also those team numbers sum to `N / w + 1`.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N)$$.  We print each of $$O(N)$$ characters in order.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$.  

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
