605. Can Place Flowers | Algorithms | Easy | Array

[TOC]

## Solution

---
#### Approach #1 Single Scan [Accepted]

The solution is very simple. We can find out the extra maximum number of flowers, $$count$$, that can be planted for the given $$flowerbed$$ arrangement. To do so, we can traverse over all the elements of the $$flowerbed$$ and find out those elements which are 0(implying an empty position). For every such element, we check if its both adjacent positions are also empty. If so, we can plant a flower at the current position without violating the no-adjacent-flowers-rule. For the first and last elements, we need not check the previous and the next adjacent positions respectively.

If the $$count$$ obtained is greater than or equal to $$n$$, the required number of flowers to be planted, we can plant $$n$$ flowers in the empty spaces, otherwise not.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$O(n)$$. A single scan of the $$flowerbed$$ array of size $$n$$ is done.

* Space complexity : $$O(1)$$. Constant extra space is used.

---
#### Approach #2 Optimized [Accepted]

**Algorithm**

Instead of finding the maximum value of $$count$$ that can be obtained, as done in the last approach, we can stop the process of checking the positions for planting the flowers as soon as $$count$$ becomes equal to $$n$$. Doing this leads to an optimization of the first approach. If $$count$$ never becomes equal to $$n$$, $$n$$ flowers can't be planted at the empty positions.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$O(n)$$. A single scan of the $$flowerbed$$ array of size $$n$$ is done.

* Space complexity : $$O(1)$$. Constant extra space is used.

---
Analysis written by: [@vinod23](https://leetcode.com/vinod23)
