638. Shopping Offers | Algorithms | Medium | Dynamic Programming, Depth-first Search

[TOC]


## Solution

---
#### Approach #1 Using Recursion [Accepted]

**Algorithm**

Before discussing the steps involved in the process, we need to note a few points. Firstly, whenever an offer is used from amongst the ones available in the $$special$$ list, we need to update the $$needs$$ appropriately, such that the number of items in the current offer of each type are deducted from the ones in the corresponding entry in $$needs$$.

Further, an offer can be used only if the number of items, of each type, required for using the offer, is lesser than or equal to the ones available in the current $$needs$$. 

Now, let's discuss the algorithm. We make use of a `shopping(price,special,needs)` function, which takes the $$price$$ and $$special$$ list along with the current(updated) $$needs$$ as the input and returns the minimum cost of buying these items as required by this $$needs$$ list. 

In every call of the function `shopping(price,special,needs)`, we do as follows:

1. Determine the cost of buying items as per the $$needs$$ array, without applying any offer. Store the result in $$res$$.

2. Iterate over every offer in the $$special$$ list. For every offer chosen, repeat steps 3 to 5.

3. Create a copy of the current $$needs$$ in a $$clone$$ list(so that the original needs can be used again, while selecting the next offer).

4. Try to apply the current offer. If possible, update the required number of items in $$clone$$.

5. If the current offer could be applied, find the minimum cost out of $$res$$ and $$offer_\current$$ + `shopping(price,special,clone)`. Here, $$offer_\current$$ refers to the price that needs to be paid for the current offer. Update the $$res$$ with the minimum value.

6. Return the $$res$$ corresponding to the minimum cost.

We need to note that the $$clone$$ needs to be updated afresh from $$needs$$(coming to the current function call) when we choose a new offer. This needs to be done, because solely applying the next offer could result in a lesser cost than the one resulting by using the previous offer first.







---

#### Approach #2 Using Recursion with memoization [Accepted]

**Algorithm**

In the last approach, we can observe that the same $$needs$$ can be reached by applying the offers in various orders. e.g. We can choose the first offer followed by the second offer or vice-versa. But, both lead to the same requirement of updated $$needs$$ and the cost as well. Thus, instead of repeating the whole process for the same $$needs$$ state through various recursive paths, we can create an entry corresponding to the current set of $$needs$$ in a HashMap, $$map$$, which stores the minimum cost corresponding to this set of $$needs$$. Thus, whenever the same call is made again in the future through a different path, we need not repeat the whole process over, and we can directly return the result stored in the $$map$$.




---
Analysis written by: [@vinod23](https://leetcode.com/vinod23)
