646. Maximum Length of Pair Chain | Algorithms | Medium | Dynamic Programming

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Dynamic Programming [Accepted]

**Intuition**

If a chain of length `k` ends at some `pairs[i]`, and `pairs[i][1] < pairs[j][0]`, we can extend this chain to a chain of length `k+1`.

**Algorithm**

Sort the pairs by first coordinate, and let `dp[i]` be the length of the longest chain ending at `pairs[i]`.  When `i < j` and `pairs[i][1] < pairs[j][0]`, we can extend the chain, and so we have the candidate answer `dp[j] = max(dp[j], dp[i] + 1)`.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N^2)$$ where $$N$$ is the length of `pairs`.  There are two for loops, and $$N^2$$ dominates the sorting step.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$ for sorting and to store `dp`.

---
#### Approach #2: Greedy [Accepted]

**Intuition**

We can greedily add to our chain.  Choosing the next addition to be the one with the lowest second coordinate is at least better than a choice with a larger second coordinate.

**Algorithm**

Consider the pairs in increasing order of their *second* coordinate.  We'll try to add them to our chain.  If we can, by the above argument we know that it is correct to do so.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N \log N)$$ where $$N$$ is the length of `S`.  The complexity comes from the sorting step, but the rest of the solution does linear work.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$.  The additional space complexity of storing `cur` and `ans`, but sorting uses $$O(N)$$ space.  Depending on the implementation of the language used, sorting can sometimes use less space.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
