651. 4 Keys Keyboard | Algorithms | Medium | Math, Dynamic Programming, Greedy

[TOC]

---

#### Approach Framework

**Explanation**

We either press 'A', or press 'CTRL+A', 'CTRL+C', and some number of 'CTRL+V's.  Thus, in the context of making `N` keypresses to write the letter 'A' `M` times, there are only two types of moves:

* Add (`1` keypress):  Add `1` to `M`.
* Multiply (`k+1` keypresses):  Multiply `M` by `k`, where `k >= 2`.

In the following explanations, we will reference these as moves.

---
#### Approach #1: Dynamic Programming [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

Say `best[k]` is the largest number of written 'A's possible after `k` keypresses.

If the last move in some optimal solution of `k` keypresses was adding, then `best[k] = best[k-1] + 1`.

Otherwise, if the last move was multiplying, then we multiplied by `x`, and `best[k-(x+1)] = best[k-(x+1)] * x` for some `x < k-1`.

Taking the best of these candidates lets us find `best[k]` in terms of previous `best[j]`, when `j < k`.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N^2)$$.  We have two nested for-loops, each of which do $$O(N)$$ work.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$, the size of `best`.

---
#### Approach #2: Optimized Dynamic Programming [Accepted]

**Intuition**

If we multiply by `2N`, paying a cost of `2N+1`, we could instead multiply by `N` then `2`, paying `N+4`.  When `N >= 3`, we don't pay more by doing it the second way.

Similarly, if we are to multiply by `2N+1` paying `2N+2`, we could instead multiply by `N+1` then `2`, paying `N+5`.  Again, when `N >= 3`, we don't pay more doing it the second way.

Thus, we never multiply by more than `5`.

**Algorithm**

Our approach is the same as *Approach #1*, except we do not consider multiplying by more than 5 in our inner loop.  For brevity, we have omitted this solution.

**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N)$$.  We have two nested for-loops, but the inner loop does $$O(1)$$ work.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$, the size of `best`.

---
#### Approach #3: Mathematical [Accepted]

**Explanation**

As in *Approach #2*, we never multiply by more than 5.

When `N` is arbitrarily large, the long run behavior of multiplying by `k` repeatedly is to get to the value $$k^{\frac{N}{k+1}}$$.  Analyzing the function $$k^{\frac{1}{k+1}}$$ at values $$k = 2, 3, 4, 5$$, it attains a peak at $$k = 4$$.  Thus, we should expect that *eventually*, `best[K] = best[K-5] * 4`.

Now, we need to make a few more deductions.

* We never add after multiplying: if we add `c` after multiplying by `k`, we should instead multiply by `k+c`.

* We never add after 5: If we add `1` then multiply by `k` to get to `(x+1) * k = xk + k`, we could instead multiply by `k+1` to get to `xk + x`.  Since `k <= 5`, we must have `x <= 5` for our additions to not be dominated.

* The number of multiplications by 2, 3, or 5 is bounded.

  * Every time we've multiplied by 2 two times, we prefer to multiply by 4 once for less cost. (4^1 for a cost of 5, vs 2^2 for a cost of 6.)
  * Every time we've multiplied by 3 five times, we prefer to multiply by 4 four times for the same cost but a larger result. (4^4 > 3^5, and cost is 20.)
  * Every time we've multiplied by 5 five times, we prefer to multiply by 4 six times for the same cost but a larger result. (4^6 > 5^5, and cost is 30.)

Together, this shows there are at most 5 additions and 9 multiplications by a number that isn't 4.

We can find the first 14 operations on 1 by hand: `1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 12, 16, 20, 27, 36, 48, 64, 81`. After that, every subsequent number is achieved by multiplying by 4: ie., `best[K] = best[K-5] * 4`.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time and Space Complexity: $$O(1)$$.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
