658. Find K Closest Elements | Algorithms | Medium | Binary Search

[TOC]


## Solution

---
#### Approach 1: Using Collection.sort()

**Algorithm**

Intuitively, we can sort the elements in list `arr` by their absolute difference values to the target `x`. Then the sublist of the first k elements is the result after sorting the elements by the natural order.



Note: This solution is inspired by [@compton_scatter](https://discuss.leetcode.com/user/compton_scatter).

**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$O(n\log n)$$. Collections.sort() uses binary sort so it has a $$O(n\log n)$$ complexity.

* Space complexity : $$O(k)$$. The in-place sorting does not consume any extra space. However, generating a k length sublist will take some space.



---
#### Approach 2: Binary Search and Two Pointers

**Algorithm**

The original array has been sorted so we can take this advantage by the following steps.
1. If the target `x` is less or equal than the first element in the sorted array, the first `k` elements are the result.
2. Similarly, if the target `x` is more or equal than the last element in the sorted array, the last `k` elements are the result.
3. Otherwise, we can use binary search to find the `index` of the element, which is equal (when this list has `x`) or a little bit larger than `x` (when this list does not have it). Then set `low` to its left `k-1` position, and `high` to the right `k-1` position of this `index` as a start. The desired k numbers must in this rang [index-k-1, index+k-1]. So we can shrink this range to get the result using the following rules.
    * If `low` reaches the lowest index `0` or the `low` element is closer to `x` than the `high` element, decrease the `high` index.
    * If `high` reaches to the highest index `arr.size()-1` or it is nearer to `x` than the `low` element, increase the `low` index.
    * The looping ends when there are exactly k elements in [low, high], the subList of which is the result.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : $$O(\log n +k)$$. $$O(\log n)$$ is for the time of binary search, while $$O(k)$$ is for shrinking the index range to k elements.

* Space complexity : $$O(k)$$. It is to generate the required sublist.


Analysis written by: [@Mr.Bin](https://discuss.leetcode.com/user/mr-bin)
