662. Maximum Width of Binary Tree | Algorithms | Medium | Tree

[TOC]

#### Approach Framework

**Explanation**

As we need to reach every node in the given tree, we will have to traverse the tree, either with a depth-first search, or with a breadth-first search.

The main idea in this question is to give each node a `position` value. If we go down the left neighbor, then `position -> position * 2`; and if we go down the right neighbor, then `position -> position * 2 + 1`. This makes it so that when we look at the position values `L` and `R` of two nodes with the same depth, the width will be `R - L + 1`.

---
#### Approach #1: Breadth-First Search [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

Traverse each node in breadth-first order, keeping track of that node's position.  For each depth, the first node reached is the left-most, while the last node reached is the right-most.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N)$$ where $$N$$ is the number of nodes in the input tree.  We traverse every node.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$, the size of our `queue`.

---
#### Approach #2: Depth-First Search [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

Traverse each node in depth-first order, keeping track of that node's position.  For each depth, the position of the first node reached of that depth will be kept in `left[depth]`.

Then, for each node, a candidate width is `pos - left[depth] + 1`.  We take the maximum of the candidate answers.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N)$$ where $$N$$ is the number of nodes in the input tree.  We traverse every node.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$, the size of the implicit call stack in our DFS.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
