671. Second Minimum Node In a Binary Tree | Algorithms | Easy | Tree

[TOC]

## Solution

---
#### Approach #1: Brute Force [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

Traverse the tree with a depth-first search, and record every unique value in the tree using a Set structure `uniques`.

Then, we'll look through the recorded values for the second minimum.  The first minimum must be $$\text{root.val}$$.




**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N)$$, where $$N$$ is the total number of nodes in the given tree.  We visit each node exactly once, and scan through the $$O(N)$$ values in `unique` once.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$, the information stored in `uniques`.

---
#### Approach #2: Ad-Hoc [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

Let $$\text{min1 = root.val}$$.  When traversing the tree at some node, $$\text{node}$$, if $$\text{node.val > min1}$$, we know all values in the subtree at $$\text{node}$$ are at least $$\text{node.val}$$, so there cannot be a better candidate for the second minimum in this subtree.  Thus, we do not need to search this subtree.

Also, as we only care about the second minimum $$\text{ans}$$, we do not need to record any values that are larger than our current candidate for the second minimum, so unlike Approach #1 we can skip maintaining a Set of values(`uniques`) entirely.





**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N)$$, where $$N$$ is the total number of nodes in the given tree.  We visit each node at most once.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$.  The information stored in $$\text{ans}$$ and $$\text{min1}$$ is $$O(1)$$, but our depth-first search may store up to $$O(h) = O(N)$$ information in the call stack, where $$h$$ is the height of the tree.

---
Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice)
