672. Bulb Switcher II | Algorithms | Medium | Math

[TOC]

#### Approach #1: Reduce Search Space [Accepted]

**Intuition**

As the search space is very large ($$2^N$$ states of lights, naively $$4^M$$ operation sequences), let us try to reduce it.

The first 6 lights uniquely determine the rest of the lights.  This is because every operation that modifies the $$x$$-th light also modifies the $$(x+6)$$-th light.

Also, operations commute: doing operation A followed by B is the same as doing operation B followed by A.  So we can assume we do all the operations in order.

Finally, doing the same operation twice in a row is the same as doing nothing.  So we only need to consider whether each operation was done 0 or 1 times.

**Algorithm**

Say we do the $$i$$-th operation $$f_i$$ times.  Let's first figure out what sets of residues are possible: that is, what sets $$c_i = f_i$$ ($$\mod 2$$ ) are possible.

Because $$c_i \equiv f_i$$ and $$c_i \leq f_i$$, if $$\sum f_i \not\equiv \sum c_i$$, or if $$\sum f_i < \sum c_i$$, it isn't possible.  Otherwise, it is possible by a simple construction: do the operations specified by $$c_i$$, then do operation number 1 with the even number of operations you have left.

For each possible set of residues, let's simulate and remember what the first 6 lights will look like, storing it in a *Set* structure `seen`.  At the end, we'll return the size of this set.

In Java, we make use of bit manipulations to manage the state of lights, where in Python we simulate it directly.




**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(1)$$.  Our checks are bounded by a constant.

* Space Complexity: $$O(1)$$, the size of the data structures used.

---
#### Approach #2: Mathematical [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

As before, the first 6 lights uniquely determine the rest of the lights.  This is because every operation that modifies the $$x$$-th light also modifies the $$(x+6)$$-th light, so the $$x$$-th light is always equal to the $$(x+6)$$-th light.

Actually, the first 3 lights uniquely determine the rest of the sequence, as shown by the table below for performing the operations a, b, c, d:

* Light 1 = 1 + a + c + d
* Light 2 = 1 + a + b
* Light 3 = 1 + a + c
* Light 4 = 1 + a + b + d
* Light 5 = 1 + a + c
* Light 6 = 1 + a + b

So that (modulo 2):

* Light 4 = (Light 1) + (Light 2) + (Light 3)
* Light 5 = Light 3
* Light 6 = Light 2

The above justifies taking $$n = min(n, 3)$$ without loss of generality.  The rest is now casework.

Let's denote the state of lights by the tuple $$(a, b, c)$$.  The transitions are to XOR by $$(1, 1, 1), (0, 1, 0), (1, 0, 1),$$ or $$(1, 0, 0)$$.

When $$m = 0$$, all the lights are on, and there is only one state $$(1, 1, 1)$$.  The answer in this case is always 1.

When $$m = 1$$, we could get states $$(0, 0, 0)$$, $$(1, 0, 1)$$, $$(0, 1, 0)$$, or $$(0, 1, 1)$$.  The answer in this case is either $$2, 3, 4$$ for $$n = 1, 2, 3$$ respectively.

When $$m = 2$$, we can manually check that we can get 7 states: all of them except for $$(0, 1, 1)$$.  The answer in this case is either $$2, 4, 7$$ for $$n = 1, 2, 3$$ respectively.

When $$m = 3$$, we can get all 8 states.  The answer in this case is either $$2, 4, 8$$ for $$n = 1, 2, 3$$ respectively.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time and Space Complexity: $$O(1)$$.  The entire program uses constants.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
