681. Next Closest Time | Algorithms | Medium | String

#### Approach #1: Simulation [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

Simulate the clock going forward by one minute.  Each time it moves forward, if all the digits are allowed, then return the current time.

The natural way to represent the time is as an integer `t` in the range `0 <= t < 24 * 60`.  Then the hours are `t / 60`, the minutes are `t % 60`, and each digit of the hours and minutes can be found by `hours / 10, hours % 10` etc.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(1)$$.  We try up to $$24 * 60$$ possible times until we find the correct time.

* Space Complexity: $$O(1)$$.

---
#### Approach #2: Build From Allowed Digits [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

We have up to 4 different allowed digits, which naively gives us `4 * 4 * 4 * 4` possible times.  For each possible time, let's check that it can be displayed on a clock: ie., `hours < 24 and mins < 60`.  The best possible `time != start` is the one with the smallest `cand_elapsed = (time - start) % (24 * 60)`, as this represents the time that has elapsed since `start`, and where the modulo operation is taken to be always non-negative.

For example, if we have `start = 720` (ie. noon), then times like `12:05 = 725` means that `(725 - 720) % (24 * 60) = 5` seconds have elapsed; while times like `00:10 = 10` means that `(10 - 720) % (24 * 60) = -710 % (24 * 60) = 730` seconds have elapsed.

Also, we should make sure to handle `cand_elapsed` carefully.  When our current candidate time `cur` is equal to the given starting time, then `cand_elapsed` will be `0` and we should handle this case appropriately.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(1)$$.  We all $$4^4$$ possible times and take the best one.

* Space Complexity: $$O(1)$$.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice)
