716. Max Stack | Algorithms | Easy | Design

[TOC]

#### Approach #1: Two Stacks [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

A regular stack already supports the first 3 operations, so we focus on the last two.

For `peekMax`, we remember the largest value we've seen on the side.  For example if we add `[2, 1, 5, 3, 9]`, we'll remember `[2, 2, 5, 5, 9]`.  This works seamlessly with `pop` operations, and also it's easy to compute: it's just the maximum of the element we are adding and the previous maximum.

For `popMax`, we know what the current maximum (`peekMax`) is.  We can pop until we find that maximum, then push the popped elements back on the stack.

Our implementation in Python will showcase extending the `list` class.




**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N)$$ for the `popMax` operation, and $$O(1)$$ for the other operations, where $$N$$ is the number of operations performed.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$, the maximum size of the stack.

---
#### Approach #2: Double Linked List + TreeMap [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Using structures like Array or Stack will never let us `popMax` quickly.  We turn our attention to tree and linked-list structures that have a lower time complexity for removal, with the aim of making `popMax` faster than $$O(N)$$ time complexity.

Say we have a double linked list as our "stack".  This reduces the problem to finding which node to remove, since we can remove nodes in $$O(1)$$ time.

We can use a TreeMap mapping values to a list of nodes to answer this question.  TreeMap can find the largest value, insert values, and delete values, all in $$O(\log N)$$ time.

**Algorithm**

Let's store the stack as a double linked list `dll`, and store a `map` from `value` to a `List` of `Node`.

* When we `MaxStack.push(x)`, we add a node to our `dll`, and add or update our entry `map.get(x).add(node)`.

* When we `MaxStack.pop()`, we find the value `val = dll.pop()`, and remove the node from our `map`, deleting the entry if it was the last one.

* When we `MaxStack.popMax()`, we use the `map` to find the relevant node to `unlink`, and return it's value.

The above operations are more clear given that we have a working `DoubleLinkedList` class.  The implementation provided uses `head` and `tail` *sentinels* to simplify the relevant `DoubleLinkedList` operations.

A Python implementation was not included for this approach because there is no analog to *TreeMap* available.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(\log N)$$ for all operations except `peek` which is $$O(1)$$, where $$N$$ is the number of operations performed.  Most operations involving `TreeMap` are $$O(\log N)$$.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$, the size of the data structures used.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
