725. Split Linked List in Parts | Algorithms | Medium | Linked List

[TOC]

#### Approach #1: Create New Lists [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

If there are $$N$$ nodes in the linked list `root`, then there are $$N / k$$ items in each part, plus the first $$N \% k$$ parts have an extra item.  We can count $$N$$ with a simple loop.

Now for each part, we have calculated how many nodes that part will have: `width + (i < remainder ? 1 : 0)`.  We create a new list and write the part to that list.

Our solution showcases constructs of the form `a = b = c`.  Note that this syntax behaves differently for different languages.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N + k)$$, where $$N$$ is the number of nodes in the given list.  If $$k$$ is large, it could still require creating many new empty lists.

* Space Complexity: $$O(max(N, k))$$, the space used in writing the answer.

---
#### Approach #2: Split Input List [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

As in *Approach #1*, we know the size of each part.  Instead of creating new lists, we will split the input list directly and return a list of pointers to nodes in the original list as appropriate.

Our solution proceeds similarly.  For a part of size `L = width + (i < remainder ? 1 : 0)`, instead of stepping `L` times, we will step `L-1` times, and our final time will also sever the link between the last node from the previous part and the first node from the next part.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N + k)$$, where $$N$$ is the number of nodes in the given list.  If $$k$$ is large, it could still require creating many new empty lists.

* Space Complexity: $$O(k)$$, the additional space used in writing the answer.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
