727. Minimum Window Subsequence | Algorithms | Hard | Dynamic Programming, Sliding Window

[TOC]


#### Approach #1: Dynamic Programming (Postfix Variation) [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Let's work on a simpler problem: `T = 'ab'`.  Whenever we find some `'b'` in `S`, we look for the most recent `'a'` that occurred before it, and that forms a candidate window `'a' = S[i], ..., S[j] = 'b'`.

A weak solution to that problem would be to just search for `'a'` every time we find a `'b'`.  With a string like `'abbb...bb'` this would be inefficient.  A better approach is to remember the last `'a'` seen.  Then when we see a `'b'`, we know the start of the window is where we last saw `'a'`, and the end of the window is where we are now.

How can we extend this approach to say, `T = 'abc'`?  Whenever we find some `'c'` in `S`, such as `S[k] = 'c'`, we can remember the most recent window that ended at `'b'`, let's say `[i, j]`.  Then our candidate window (that is, the smallest possible window ending at `k`) would be `[i, k]`.

Our approach in general works this way.  We add characters to `T` one at a time, and for every `S[k] = T[-1]` we always remember the length of the candidate window ending at `k`.  We can calculate this using knowledge of the length of the previous window (so we'll need to remember the last window seen).  This leads to a dynamic programming solution.

**Algorithm**

As we iterate through `T[j]`, let's maintain `cur[e] = s` as the largest index such that `T[:j]` is a subsequence of `S[s: e+1]`, (or `-1` if impossible.)  Now we want to find `new`, the largest indexes for `T[:j+1]`.

To update our knowledge as `j += 1`, if `S[i] == T[j]`, then `last` (the largest `s` we have seen so far) represents a new valid window `[s, i]`.

In Python, we use `cur` and `new`, while in Java we use `dp[j]` and `dp[~j]` to keep track of the last two rows of our dynamic programming.

At the end, we look at all the windows we have and choose the best.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(ST)$$, where $$S, T$$ are the lengths of `S, T`.  We have two for-loops.

* Space Complexity: $$O(S)$$, the length of `dp`.

---
#### Approach #2: Dynamic Programming (Next Array Variation) [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Let's guess that the minimum window will start at `S[i]`.  We can assume that `S[i] = T[0]`.  Then, we should find the next occurrence of `T[1]` in `S[i+1:]`, say at `S[j]`.  Then, we should find the next occurrence of `T[2]` in `S[j+1:]`, and so on.

Finding the next occurrence can be precomputed in linear time so that each guess becomes $$O(T)$$ work.

**Algorithm**

We can precompute (for each `i` and `letter`), `next[i][letter]`: the index of the first occurrence of `letter` in `S[i:]`, or `-1` if it is not found.

Then, we'll maintain a set of minimum windows for `T[:j]` as `j` increases.  At the end, we'll take the best minimum window.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(ST)$$, where $$S, T$$ are the lengths of `S, T`, and assuming a fixed-sized alphabet.  The precomputation of `nxt` is $$O(S)$$, and the other work happens in two for-loops.

* Space Complexity: $$O(S)$$, the size of `windows`.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).  Approach #1 inspired by [@zestypanda](https://leetcode.com/zestypanda/).
