731. My Calendar II | Algorithms | Medium | Ordered Map

[TOC]

#### Approach #1: Brute Force [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Maintain a list of bookings and a list of double bookings.  When booking a new event `[start, end)`, if it conflicts with a double booking, it will have a triple booking and be invalid.  Otherwise, parts that overlap the calendar will be a double booking.

**Algorithm**

Evidently, two events `[s1, e1)` and `[s2, e2)` do *not* conflict if and only if one of them starts after the other one ends: either `e1 <= s2` OR `e2 <= s1`.  By De Morgan's laws, this means the events conflict when `s1 < e2` AND `s2 < e1`.

If our event conflicts with a double booking, it's invalid.  Otherwise, we add conflicts with the calendar to our double bookings, and add the event to our calendar.




**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N^2)$$, where $$N$$ is the number of events booked.  For each new event, we process every previous event to decide whether the new event can be booked.  This leads to $$\sum_k^N O(k) = O(N^2)$$ complexity.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$, the size of the `calendar`.

---
#### Approach #2: Boundary Count [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

When booking a new event `[start, end)`, count `delta[start]++` and `delta[end]--`.  When processing the values of `delta` in sorted order of their keys, the running sum `active` is the number of events open at that time.  If the sum is 3 or more, that time is (at least) triple booked.

A Python implementation was not included for this approach because there is no analog to *TreeMap* available.

```java
class MyCalendarTwo {
    TreeMap delta;

    public MyCalendarTwo() {
        delta = new TreeMap();
    }

    public boolean book(int start, int end) {
        delta.put(start, delta.getOrDefault(start, 0) + 1);
        delta.put(end, delta.getOrDefault(end, 0) - 1);

        int active = 0;
        for (int d: delta.values()) {
            active += d;
            if (active >= 3) {
                delta.put(start, delta.get(start) - 1);
                delta.put(end, delta.get(end) + 1);
                if (delta.get(start) == 0)
                    delta.remove(start);
                return false;
            }
        }
        return true;
    }
}
```

**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N^2)$$, where $$N$$ is the number of events booked.  For each new event, we traverse `delta` in $$O(N)$$ time.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$, the size of `delta`.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).  Solution in Approach #2 inspired by [@cchao](https://discuss.leetcode.com/topic/111276/simplified-winner-s-solution).
