737. Sentence Similarity II | Algorithms | Medium | Depth-first Search, Union Find

[TOC]

#### Approach #1: Depth-First Search [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Two words are similar if they are the same, or there is a path connecting them from edges represented by `pairs`.

We can check whether this path exists by performing a depth-first search from a word and seeing if we reach the other word.  The search is performed on the underlying graph specified by the edges in `pairs`.

**Algorithm**

We start by building our `graph` from the edges in `pairs`.  

The specific algorithm we go for is an iterative depth-first search.  The implementation we go for is a typical "visitor pattern": when searching whether there is a path from `w1 = words1[i]` to `w2 = words2[i]`, `stack` will contain all the nodes that are queued up for processing, while `seen` will be all the nodes that have been queued for processing (whether they have been processed or not).



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(NP)$$, where $$N$$ is the maximum length of `words1` and `words2`, and $$P$$ is the length of `pairs`.  Each of $$N$$ searches could search the entire graph.

* Space Complexity: $$O(P)$$, the size of `pairs`.

---
#### Approach #2: Union-Find [Accepted]

**Intuition**

As in *Approach #1*, we want to know if there is path connecting two words from edges represented by `pairs`.

Our problem comes down to finding the connected components of a graph.  This is a natural fit for a *Disjoint Set Union* (DSU) structure.

**Algorithm**

Draw edges between words if they are similar.  For easier interoperability between our DSU template, we will map each `word` to some integer `ix = index[word]`.  Then, `dsu.find(ix)` will tell us a unique id representing what component that word is in.

For more information on DSU, please look at *Approach #2* in the [article here](https://leetcode.com/articles/redundant-connection/).  For brevity, the solutions showcased below do not use *union-by-rank*.

After putting each word in `pairs` into our DSU template, we check successive pairs of words `w1, w2 = words1[i], words2[i]`.  We require that `w1 == w2`, or `w1` and `w2` are in the same component.  This is easily checked using `dsu.find`.




**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N \log P + P)$$, where $$N$$ is the maximum length of `words1` and `words2`, and $$P$$ is the length of `pairs`.  If we used union-by-rank, this complexity improves to $$O(N * \alpha(P) + P) \approx O(N + P)$$, where $$\alpha$$ is the *Inverse-Ackermann* function.

* Space Complexity: $$O(P)$$, the size of `pairs`.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
