740. Delete and Earn | Algorithms | Medium | Dynamic Programming

[TOC]


#### Approach #1: Dynamic Programming [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Because all numbers are positive, if we "take" a number (use it to score points), we might as well take all copies of it, since we've already erased all its neighbors.  We could keep a count of each number so we know how many points taking a number is worth total.

Now let's investigate what happens when we add a new number `X` (plus copies) that is larger than all previous numbers.  Naively, our answer would be the previous answer, plus the value of `X` - which can be solved with dynamic programming.  However, this fails if our previous answer had a number taken that was adjacent to `X`.

Luckily, we can remedy this.  Let's say we knew `using`, the value of our previous answer, and `avoid`, the value of our previous answer that doesn't use the previously largest value `prev`.  Then we could compute new values of `using` and `avoid` appropriately.

**Algorithm**

For each unique value `k` of `nums` in increasing order, let's maintain the correct values of `avoid` and `using`, which represent the answer if we don't take or take `k` respectively.

If the new value `k` is adjacent to the previously largest value `prev`, then the answer if we must take `k` is `(the point value of k) + avoid`, while the answer if we must not take `k` is `max(avoid, using)`.  Similarly, if `k` is not adjacent to `prev`, the answer if we must take `k` is `(the point value of k) + max(avoid, using)`, and the answer if we must not take `k` is `max(avoid, using)`.

At the end, the best answer may or may not use the largest value in `nums`, so we return `max(avoid, using)`.

Our demonstrated solutions showcase two different kinds of sorts: a library one, and a radix sort.  For each language, the other kind of solution can be done without much difficulty, by using an array (Python) or HashMap (Java) respectively.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity (Python): $$O(N \log N)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `nums`.  We make a single pass through the sorted keys of $$N$$, and the complexity is dominated by the sorting step.

* Space Complexity (Python): $$O(N)$$, the size of our `count`.

* Time Complexity (Java): We performed a radix sort instead, so our complexity is $$O(N+W)$$ where $$W$$ is the range of allowable values for `nums[i]`.

* Space Complexity (Java): $$O(W)$$, the size of our `count`.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
