752. IP to CIDR | Algorithms | Easy | Bit Manipulation

[TOC]

#### Approach #1: Direct [Accepted]

**Intuition**

This problem is about performing the steps directly as written.  The tricky part is managing the bit manipulations involved.

Let's ask the question: for a number `n` of ip addresses desired, and the starting address `ip` of that range, what is the CIDR block representing the most ip addresses in that range starting at `ip`?  Evidently, this greedy approach will work, and we can keep repeating this until we are done, so let's just focus on creating one largest block.

**Algorithm**

We'll need to be able to convert `ip` addresses back and forth to integers (`long`).  We can do this with some basic manipulations - see the code for more details.

Then, with an ip address like `255.0.0.24` converted to `start`, it ends in the binary `00011000`.  There are some cases.  If `n >= 8`, then we should use the entire block `255.0.0.24/29`.  Otherwise, we can only take a number of addresses equal to the largest power of 2 less than or equal to `n`.

In a more general setting, we use the bit lengths of both `n` and `start & -start` (the lowest bit of `start`) to compute the `mask` which represents $$2^{32 - \text{mask}}$$ ip addresses.  Then, we adjust `start` and `n` appropriately.

In Java and C++, we should be careful to use `long` data types to represent the converted ip addresses, since the number could exceed $$2^{31}$$.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N)$$ where $$N$$ is the length of `nums`.

* Space Complexity: $$O(1)$$, the space used by our `int` variables.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
