753. Open the Lock | Algorithms | Medium | Breadth-first Search

[TOC]

#### Approach #1: Breadth-First Search [Accepted]

**Intuition**

We can think of this problem as a shortest path problem on a graph: there are `10000` nodes (strings `'0000'` to `'9999'`), and there is an edge between two nodes if they differ in one digit, that digit differs by 1 (wrapping around, so `'0'` and `'9'` differ by 1), and if both nodes are not in `deadends`.

**Algorithm**

To solve a shortest path problem, we use a breadth-first search.  The basic structure uses a Queue `queue` plus a Set `seen` that records if a node has ever been enqueued.  This pushes all the work to the `neighbors` function - in our Python implementation, all the code after `while queue:` is template code, except for `if node in dead: continue`.

As for the `neighbors` function, for each position in the lock `i = 0, 1, 2, 3`, for each of the turns `d = -1, 1`, we determine the value of the lock after the `i`-th wheel has been turned in the direction `d`.

Care should be taken in our algorithm, as the graph does not have an edge unless *both* nodes are not in `deadends`.  If our `neighbors` function checks only the `target` for being in `deadends`, we also need to check whether `'0000'` is in `deadends` at the beginning.  In our implementation, we check at the visitor level so as to neatly handle this problem in all cases.

In Java, our implementation also inlines the neighbors function for convenience, and uses `null` inputs in the `queue` to represent a layer change.  When the layer changes, we `depth++` our global counter, and `queue.peek() != null` checks if there are still nodes enqueued.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N^2 * \mathcal{A}^N + D)$$ where $$\mathcal{A}$$ is the number of digits in our alphabet, $$N$$ is the number of digits in the lock, and $$D$$ is the size of `deadends`.  We might visit every lock combination, plus we need to instantiate our set `dead`.  When we visit every lock combination, we spend $$O(N^2)$$ time enumerating through and constructing each node. 

* Space Complexity: $$O(\mathcal{A}^N + D)$$, for the `queue` and the set `dead`.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
