759. Set Intersection Size At Least Two | Algorithms | Hard | Greedy

[TOC]

#### Approach #1: Greedy [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Let's try to solve a simpler problem: what is the answer when the set intersection size is at least *one*?

Sort the points.  Take the last interval `[s, e]`, which point on this interval will be in `S`?  Since every other interval has start point `<= s`, it is strictly better to choose `s` as the start.  So we can repeatedly take `s` in our set `S` and remove all intervals containing `s`.

We will try to extend this solution to the case when we want an intersection of size two.

**Algorithm**

For each interval, we will perform the algorithm described above, storing a `todo` *multiplicity* which starts at `2`.  As we identify points in `S`, we will subtract from these multiplicities as appropriate.

One case that is important to handle is the following:
`[[1, 2], [2, 3], [2, 4], [4, 5]]`.  If we put `4, 5` in `S`, then we put `2` in `S`, when handling `[2, 3]` we need to put `3` in `S`, not `2` which was already put.

We can handle this case succinctly by sorting intervals `[s, e]` by `s` ascending, then `e` descending.  This makes it so that any interval encountered with the same `s` has the lowest possible `e`, and so it has the highest *multiplicity*.  When at interval `[s, e]` and choosing points to be included into `S`, it will always be the case that the start of the interval (either `s` or `s, s+1`) will be unused.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N^2)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `intervals`.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
