774. Maximum Depth of N-ary Tree | Algorithms | Easy | Tree, Depth-first Search, Breadth-first Search

[TOC]

## Solution

**Tree definition**

First of all, please refer to [this article](https://leetcode.com/articles/maximum-depth-of-binary-tree/) 
for the solution in case of binary tree.
This article offers the same ideas with a bit of generalisation. 

Here is the definition of the ```TreeNode``` which we would use.






---
#### Approach 1: Recursion

**Algorithm**

The intuitive approach is to solve the problem by recursion.
Here we demonstrate an example with the DFS (Depth First Search) strategy. 



**Complexity analysis**

* Time complexity : we visit each node exactly once, 
thus the time complexity is $$\mathcal{O}(N)$$,
where $$N$$ is the number of nodes.

* Space complexity : in the worst case, the tree is completely unbalanced,
*e.g.* each node has only one child node, the recursion call would occur
 $$N$$ times (the height of the tree), therefore the storage to keep the call stack would be $$\mathcal{O}(N)$$.
 But in the best case (the tree is completely balanced), the height of the tree would be $$\log(N)$$.
 Therefore, the space complexity in this case would be $$\mathcal{O}(\log(N))$$.




---
#### Approach 2: Iteration

We could also convert the above recursion into iteration, with the help of stack.

>The idea is to visit each node with the DFS strategy,
while updating the max depth at each visit.

So we start from a stack which contains the root node and the corresponding depth 
which is ```1```.
Then we proceed to the iterations: pop the current node out of the stack and
push the child nodes. The depth is updated at each step. 

  

**Complexity analysis**

* Time complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(N)$$.

* Space complexity : $$\mathcal{O}(N)$$.
 
Analysis written by @[liaison](https://leetcode.com/liaison/)
and @[andvary](https://leetcode.com/andvary/)
