790. Global and Local Inversions | Algorithms | Medium | Array, Math

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Brute Force [Time Limit Exceeded]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

A local inversion is also a global inversion.  Thus, we only need to check if our permutation has any non-local inversion (`A[i] > A[j], i  1`.

To do this, we can check every `i, j` directly.




**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N^2)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `A`.

* Space Complexity: $$O(1)$$.

---
#### Approach #2: Remember Minimum [Accepted]

**Intuition**

In performing a brute force, we repeatedly want to check whether there is some `j >= i+2` for which `A[i] > A[j]`.  This is the same as checking for `A[i] > min(A[i+2:])`.  If we knew these minimums `min(A[0:]), min(A[1:]), min(A[2:]), ...` we could make this check quickly.

**Algorithm**

Let's iterate through `A` from right to left, remembering the minimum value we've seen.  If we remembered the minimum `floor = min(A[i:])` and `A[i-2] > floor`, then we should return `False`.  This search is exhaustive, so if we don't find anything after iterating through `A`, we should return `True`.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `A`.

* Space Complexity: $$O(1)$$.

---
#### Approach #3: Linear Scan [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

Let's try to characterize all *ideal* permutations: ones that do not have non-local inversions.  Where does the `0` go?

If the `0` occurs at index `2` or greater, then `A[0] > A[2] = 0` is a non-local inversion.  So `0` can only occur at index `0` or `1`.  If `A[1] = 0`, then we must have `A[0] = 1` otherwise `A[0] > A[j] = 1` is a non-local inversion.  Otherwise, `A[0] = 0`.  To recap, the possibilities are either `A = [0] + (ideal permutation of 1...N-1)` or `A = [1, 0] + (ideal permutation of 2...N-1)`.

A necessary and sufficient condition for these possibilities is that `Math.abs(A[i] - i) <= 1`.  So we check this for every `i`.



---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).  Approach #3 inspired by @bangbangbear.
