793. Swap Adjacent in LR String | Algorithms | Medium | Brainteaser

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Invariant [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Let's think of `'L'` and `'R'` as people facing left and right standing on one line, and `'X'` as an empty space on that line.

We can ask: what invariants (conditions that remain true after making any move) there are.  This is natural for any question that involves transforming some state and asking whether a final state is possible.

**Algorithm**

One invariant is that `'L'` and `'R'` characters in the string can never cross each other - people walking on the line cannot pass through each other.  That means the starting and target strings must be the same when reading only the `'L'` and `'R'`s.  With respect to some starting string, let's call such a target string "*solid*" (since the people don't pass through each other).

Additionally, the `n`-th `'L'` can never go to the right of it's original position, and similarly the `n`-th `'R'` can never go to the left of it's original position.  We'll call this "*accessibility*".  Formally, if $$(i_1, i_2, \cdots )$$ and $$(i^{'}_1, i^{'}_2, \cdots )$$ are the positions of each `'L'` character in the source and target string, and similarly for $$(j_i \cdots ), (j^{'}_1 \cdots )$$ and positions of `'R'` characters, then we will say a target string is *accessible* if $$i_k \geq i^{'}_k$$ and $$j_k \leq j^{'}_k$$.

This shows being solid and accessible are necessary conditions.  With an induction on the number of people, we can show that they are sufficient conditions.  The basic idea of the proof is this: A person on the end either walks away from the others, or walks towards.  If they walk away, then let them walk first and it is true; if they walk towards, then let them walk last and it is true (by virtue of the target being solid).

With these ideas in hand, we'll investigate the two properties individually.  If they are both true, then the answer is `True`, otherwise it is `False`.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `start` and `end`.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(N)$$.  The replacement operation is $$O(N)$$, while the remaining operations use $$O(1)$$ additional space.  We could amend the replace part of our algorithm to use pointers so as to reduce the total complexity to $$O(1)$$.

---

#### Approach #2: Two Pointers [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

Following the explanation in *Approach #1*, the target string must be solid and accessible.

We use two pointers to solve it.  Each pointer `i`, `j` points to an index of `start`, `end` with `start[i] != 'X'`, `end[j] != 'X'`.

Then, if `start[i] != end[j]`, the target string isn't solid.  Also, if `start[i] == 'L' and i  j`), the string is not accessible.

In our Python implementation, we use generators to handle moving `i, j` to the next index where `start[i] != 'X', end[j] != 'X'`.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `start` and `end`.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(1)$$.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).  Approach #2 inspired by [vegito2002](https://discuss.leetcode.com/post/246144).
