797. Rabbits in Forest | Algorithms | Medium | Hash Table, Math

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Count [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Each rabbit that says a different number must be a different color, and a rabbit only tells us information about rabbits of its color.  We can count the number of rabbits of each color separately.

Now, say `13` rabbits answer `5`.  What does this imply?  Say one of the rabbits is red.  We could have 5 other red rabbits in this group answering `5`, but not more.  So, say another rabbit in this group is a different color (blue).  We could have 5 other blue rabbits in this group answering `5`, but not more.  Finally, another rabbit must be a different color (green), and there are 5 other green rabbits (in the forest).

Notice there must be a minimum of 18 rabbits saying 5 (answering or in the forest), since there must be at least 3 unique colors among rabbits that answered or would have answered `5`, so it didn't matter that we chose the rabbits to be grouped by color or not when answering.

**Algorithm**

In general, if `v = count[k]` rabbits answered `k`, there must be at least `a` rabbits that answered or would have answered `k`, where `a` is the smallest multiple of `k+1` such that `a >= count[k]`.

We add all these `a`s together.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N)$$, where $$N$$ is the number of rabbits that answered.  In Java, our implementation using `int[]` instead of a `Map` would be $$O(N + W)$$, where $$W$$ is the number of possible different answers that rabbits could say.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(N)$$.  In Java, our implementation is $$O(W)$$.


---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
