801. Is Graph Bipartite? | Algorithms | Medium | Depth-first Search, Breadth-first Search, Graph

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Coloring by Depth-First Search [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Color a node blue if it is part of the first set, else red.  We should be able to greedily color the graph if and only if it is bipartite: one node being blue implies all it's neighbors are red, all those neighbors are blue, and so on.



    



**Algorithm**

We'll keep an array (or hashmap) to lookup the color of each node: `color[node]`.  The colors could be `0`, `1`, or uncolored (`-1` or `null`).

We should be careful to consider disconnected components of the graph, by searching each node.  For each uncolored node, we'll start the coloring process by doing a depth-first-search on that node.  Every neighbor gets colored the opposite color from the current node.  If we find a neighbor colored the same color as the current node, then our coloring was impossible.

To perform the depth-first search, we use a `stack`.  For each uncolored neighbor in `graph[node]`, we'll color it and add it to our `stack`, which acts as a sort of "todo list" of nodes to visit next.  Our larger loop `for start...` ensures that we color every node.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N + E)$$, where $$N$$ is the number of nodes in the graph, and $$E$$ is the number of edges.  We explore each node once when we transform it from uncolored to colored, traversing all its edges in the process.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(N)$$, the space used to store the `color`.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
