802. K-th Smallest Prime Fraction | Algorithms | Hard | Binary Search, Heap

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Binary Search [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Let `under(x)` be the number of fractions below `x`.  It's an increasing function on `x`, so we can binary search for the correct answer.

**Algorithm**

Let's binary search for `x` such that there are exactly `K` fractions below `x`.  At the same time, we'll record the largest such fraction seen that was still below `x`.

Our binary search follows a similar template as other binary searches: we have some interval `[lo, hi]` and a midpoint `mi = (lo + hi) / 2.0`.  If the number of fractions below `mi` is less than `K`, then we will now consider the interval `[mi, hi]`; otherwise we will consider the interval `[lo, mi]`.  For more on Binary Search, please visit the excellent LeetCode Explore card [here](https://leetcode.com/explore/learn/card/binary-search/) on this topic.

Our `under(x)` function has two objectives: to return the number of fractions below `x`, as well as the maximum such fraction below `x`.  To count this, we will use a sliding window approach: for each `primes[j]`, we'll find the largest `i` so that `primes[i] / primes[j] < x`.  These `i`s are necessarily increasing as `j` (and `primes[j]`) increases, so this check is linear.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N \log W)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `primes`, and `W` is the width (in quantized units) of our binary search, `(hi - lo) / 1e-9` which is $$10^9$$.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(1)$$.


---
#### Approach #2: Heap [Accepted]

**Intuition**

We'll maintain a heap of potential fractions - the smallest unused fractions with denominator `primes[j]`.  We'll pop `K-1` elements from this heap, then the final fraction will be the answer.

**Algorithm**

In Python, storing the fractions will be done with a tuple `(fraction, i, j)`, representing the fraction `fraction = primes[i] / primes[j]`.  When we use this fraction, we will push the next fraction `(primes[i+1] / primes[j], i+1, j)` onto the heap, assuming that the next fraction is valid (ie., that `i+1 < j`).

In Java, storing the fractions will be done as an `int[2]` of `{i, j}` (indexes, not elements of `A`), and we use a custom comparator to ensure the right elements are `pq.offer`ed correctly.

With this detail out of the way, the solution is straightforward.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(K \log N)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `A`.  The heap has up to $$N$$ elements, which uses $$O(\log N)$$ work to perform a pop operation on the heap.  We perform $$O(K)$$ such operations.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(N)$$, the size of the heap.

---
#### Approach #3: Divide and Conquer [Accepted]

**Explanation**

One approach outside the scope of this article is to perform a divide and conquer, leading to a marvelous $$O(N)$$ time complexity.  We can write the prime fractions in a matrix such that both the rows and columns are increasing, and we are looking for the `K`th element.  The main idea is that this is fairly "close" to the `K/4`th element in the matrix where we remove every odd numbered row and column from the original matrix.

For more information on this approach, visit @StefanPochmann's forum post [here](https://leetcode.com/problems/k-th-smallest-prime-fraction/discuss/115545/O(n)).

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
