803. Cheapest Flights Within K Stops | Algorithms | Medium | Dynamic Programming, Heap, Breadth-first Search

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Maintain Cheapest To Target [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

Say `pre[node]` is the smallest distance to that node within `T` stops.  Let's try to find the smallest distance `dis[node]` to that node within `T+1` rounds.  For every `edge in flights` that connects places `u` and `v` with cost `w`, the new distance would be `dis[v] = min(dis[v], pre[u] + w)`.

Actually, we'll use `dis = dist[0]` and `pre = dist[1]` initially.  That will let us reuse the arrays `dis = dist[1]` and `pre = dist[0]` for the next iteration `(i = 1)` in our loop, and so on.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(E * K)$$, where $$E$$ is the length of `flights`.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(n)$$, the space used to store `dis` and `pre`.


---
#### Approach #2: Dijkstra's [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Instead of nodes being places, use places and number of stops.  We want to find the lowest cost from source to target, which makes Dijkstra's a good candidate algorithm.

If we continually extend our potential flightpaths in order of cost, we know once we've reached the destination `dst` that it was the lowest cost way to get there.  This is the idea behind Dijkstra's algorithm.

**Algorithm**

Dijkstra's algorithm uses a priority queue to continually search the next node with the lowest cost.  

If we've come to a node and it has a lower recorded cost or we've taken too many steps, we don't need to search it.  If we reach our destination, because we are searching in order of lowest cost first, it must have the lowest cost.

Otherwise, for every outbound flight from `node` that is better, we'll add it to our priority queue of things to search.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(E + n \log n)$$, where $$E$$ is the total number of flights.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(n)$$, the size of the heap.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).  Approach #1 inspired by @chenl3.
