804. Rotated Digits | Algorithms | Easy | String

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Brute Force [Accepted]

**Intuition**

For each `X` from `1` to `N`, let's analyze whether `X` is good.

* If `X` has a digit that does not have a valid rotation (`3`, `4`, or `7`), then it can't be good.

* If `X` doesn't have a digit that rotates to a different digit (`2`, `5`, `6`, or `9`), it can't be good because `X` will be the same after rotation.

* Otherwise, `X` will successfully rotate to a valid different number.

**Algorithm**

To handle checking the digits of `X`, we showcase two implementations.  The most obvious way is to parse the string; another way is to recursively check the last digit of `X`.

See the comments in each implementation for more details.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N \log N)$$.  For each `X`, we check each digit.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(\log N)$$, the space stored either by the string, or the recursive call stack of the function `good`.


---
#### Approach #2: Dynamic Programming On Digits [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Say we are writing a good number digit by digit.  The necessary and sufficient conditions are: we need to write using only digits from `0125689`, write a number less than or equal to `N`, and write at least one digit from `2569`.

We can use dynamic programming to solve this efficiently.  Our state will be how many digits `i` we have written, whether we have previously written a `j`th digit lower than the `j`th digit of `N`, and whether we have previously written a digit from `2569`.  We will represent this state by three variables: `i, equality_flag, involution_flag`.

`dp(i, equality_flag, involution_flag)` will represent the number of ways to write the suffix of `N` corresponding to these above conditions.  The answer we want is `dp(0, True, False)`.

**Algorithm**

If `equality_flag` is true, the `i`th digit (0 indexed) will be at most the `i`th digit of `N`.  For each digit `d`, we determine if we can write `d` based on the flags that are currently set.

In the below implementations, we showcase both top-down and bottom-up approaches.  The four lines in the top-down approach (Python) from `for d in xrange(...` to before `memo[...] = ans` clearly illustrates the recursive relationship between states in our dynamic programming.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(\log N)$$.  We do constant-time work for each digit of `N`.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(\log N)$$, the space stored by `memo`.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
