806. Domino and Tromino Tiling | Algorithms | Medium | Dynamic Programming

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Dynamic Programming [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Let `dp[state]` be the previous number of ways to fill `i` columns where the i-th row of the last column is filled if the i-th bit of `state` is 1.

In particular, `dp[0]` will be the number of ways to fill `i` columns where the last column has nothing filled; `dp[1]` will be the number of ways with the square in the last row filled; `dp[2]` will be the number of ways with the square in the first row filled; and `dp[3]` will be the number of ways with the squares in both rows filled.

From there, we only have to accurately record the transitions.

**Algorithm**

If in the future we have:

* 0 rows filled - it could have come from either:
    * having 0 rows filled and a vertical domino, or
    * both rows filled and nothing.

* last row filled - it could have come from either:
    * having 0 rows filled and an L shaped tromino, or
    * having top row filled and a horizontal domino


* first row filled - case is symmetric to the 'last row filled' case

* both rows filled - could have come from either:
    * having 0 rows filled and two horizontal dominos, or
    * having 1 row filled and an L shaped tromino (two cases.)

After writing the recurrence correctly, the solution follows.



    





**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N)$$.  We update the state `N` times.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(1)$$.

---
#### Approach #2: Matrix Exponentiation

**Intuition**

The recurrence expressed in *Approach #1* expressed states that transitioned to a linear combination of other states.  Any time this happens, we can represent the entire transition as a matrix of those linear combinations.  Then, the $$n$$-th power of this matrix represents the transition of $$n$$ moves, and thus we can reduce the problem to a problem of matrix exponentiation.

**Algorithm**

Let $$T$$ be the linear transformation taking `dp -> ndp` under the notation in *Approach #1*.  Then, the matrix $$T^n$$ represents the transformation $$n$$ times in a row.

To compute $$T^n$$ efficiently, we use the trick $$T^{2k} = T^k * T^k$$ and $$T^{2k + 1} = T * T^{2k}$$ to reduce the exponentiation to $$O(\log n)$$ multiplications.  To multiply two matrices, we use the textbook definition.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(\log N)$$.  We perform $$O(\log N)$$ multiplications.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(\log N)$$, the size of the recursive call stack.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).  Approach #2 inspired by [@ngoc_lam](https://leetcode.com/problems/domino-and-tromino-tiling/discuss/116546/Using-recurrence-Log(N)-very-Quick-LOG(N)-in-java-can-run-with-N-1000000000).
