814. Smallest Rotation with Highest Score | Algorithms | Hard | 

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Interval Stabbing [Accepted]

**Intuition**

Say `N = 10` and `A[2] = 5`.  Then there are 5 rotations that are bad for this number: rotation indexes `0, 1, 2, 8, 9` - these rotations will cause this number to not get 1 point later.

In general, for each number in the array, we can map out what rotation indexes will be bad for this number.  It will always be a region of one interval, possibly two if the interval wraps around (eg. `8, 9, 0, 1, 2` wraps around, to become `[8, 9]` and `[0, 1, 2]`.)

At the end of plotting these intervals, we need to know which rotation index has the least intervals overlapping it - this one is the answer.

**Algorithm**

First, an element like `A[2] = 5` will not get score in (up to) 5 posiitons: when the 5 is at final index 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4.  When we shift by 2, we'll get final index 0.  If we shift `5-1 = 4` before this, this element will end up at final index 4.  In general (modulo N), a shift of `i - A[i] + 1` to `i` will be the rotation indexes that will make `A[i]` not score a point.

If we are trying to plot an interval like `[2, 3, 4]`, then instead of doing `bad[2]--; bad[3]--; bad[4]--;`, what we will do instead is keep track of the cumulative total: `bad[2]--; bad[5]++`.  For "wrap-around" intervals like `[8, 9, 0, 1, 2]`, we will keep track of this as two separate intervals: `bad[8]--, bad[10]++, bad[0]--, bad[3]++`.  (Actually, because of our implementation, we don't need to remember the `bad[10]++` part.)

At the end, we want to find a rotation index with the least intervals overlapping.  We'll maintain a cumulative total `cur` representing how many intervals are currently overlapping our current rotation index, then update it as we step through each rotation index.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `A`.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
