818. Similar RGB Color | Algorithms | Easy | Math, String

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Brute Force [Accepted]

**Intuition**

For each possible shorthand-RGB color from `"#000"` to `"#fff"`, let's find it's similarity to the given color.  We'll take the best one.

**Algorithm**

This problem is straightforward, but there are a few tricky implementation details.

To iterate over each shorthand color, we'll use an integer based approach, (though other ones exist.)  Each digit in the shorthand `"#RGB"` could be from 0 to 15.  This leads to a color of 17 * R * (1 << 16) + 17 * G * (1 << 8) + 17 * B.  The reason for the 17 is because a hexadecimal value of `0x22` is equal to `2 * 16 + 2 * 1` which is `2 * (17)`.  The other values for red and green work similarly, just shifted up by 8 or 16 bits.

To determine the similarity between two colors represented as integers, we'll sum the similarity of each of their colored components separately.  For a color like `hex1`, it has 3 colored components `r1 = (hex1 >> 16) % 256, g1 = (hex1 >> 8) % 256, b1 = (hex1 >> 0) % 256`.  Then, the first addend in the similarity is `-(r1 - r2) * (r1 - r2)`, etc.

To convert an integer back to a hex string, we'll use `String.format`.  The `06` refers to a zero padded string of length 6, while `x` refers to lowercase hexadecimal.

Finally, it should be noted that the answer is always unique.  Indeed, for two numbers that differ by 17, every integer is closer to one than the other.  For example, with `0` and `17`, `8` is closer to `0` and `9` is closer to `17` - there is no number that is tied in closeness.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time and Space Complexity:  $$O(1)$$.

---
#### Approach #2: Rounding By Component [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

Because color similarity is a sum of the similarity of individual color components, we can treat each colored component separately and combine the answer.

As in the previous approach, we want the colored component to be the closest to a multiple of 17.  We can just round it to the closest such value.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time and Space Complexity:  $$O(1)$$.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
