821. Bricks Falling When Hit | Algorithms | Hard | Union Find

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Reverse Time and Union-Find [Accepted]

**Intuition**

The problem is about knowing information about the connected components of a graph as we cut vertices.  In particular, we'll like to know the size of the "roof" (component touching the top edge) between each cut.  Here, a cut refers to the erasure of a vertex.

As we may know, a useful data structure for joining connected components is a disjoint set union structure.  The key idea in this problem is that we can use this structure if we work in reverse: instead of looking at the graph as a series of sequential cuts, we'll look at the graph after all the cuts, and reverse each cut.

**Algorithm**

We'll modify our typical disjoint-set-union structure to include a `dsu.size` operation, that tells us the size of this component.  The way we do this is whenever we make a component point to a new parent, we'll also send it's size to that parent.

We'll also include `dsu.top`, which tells us the size of the "roof", or the component connected to the top edge.  We use an *ephemeral* "source" node with label `R * C` where all nodes on the top edge (with row number `0`) are connected to the source node.

For more information on DSU, please look at *Approach #2* in the [article here](https://leetcode.com/articles/redundant-connection/).

Next, we'll introduce `A`, the grid after all the cuts have happened, and initialize our disjoint union structure on the graph induced by `A` (nodes are grid squares with a brick; edges between 4-directionally adjacent nodes).

After, if we get an cut at `(r, c)` but the original `grid[r][c]` was always `0`, then we couldn't have had a meaningful cut - the number of dropped bricks is `0`.

Otherwise, we'll look at the size of the new roof after adding this brick at `(r, c)`, and compare them to find the number of dropped bricks.

Since we were working in reverse time order, we should reverse our working answer to arrive at our final answer.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N*Q*\alpha(N * Q))$$, where $$N = R*C$$ is the number of grid squares, $$Q$$ is the length of `hits`, and $$\alpha$$ is the *Inverse-Ackermann function*.

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
