826. Soup Servings | Algorithms | Medium | Dynamic Programming

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Dynamic Programming [Accepted]

**Intuition**

First, we can simplify all the numbers by dividing by 25.  More specifically, each unit is 25ml, and partial quantities of 25ml are rounded up to a full quantity.

When `N` is small, this is a relatively straightforward dynamic programming problem: we have quantities of soup represented by the state `(x, y)`, and we can either go to `(x-4, y-0)`, `(x-3, y-1)`, `(x-2, y-2)`, or `(x-1, y-3)` each with equal probability.  

When `N` is very large, this approach fails, so we need a different idea.

Instead of serving in batches of `(4, 0), (3, 1), (2, 2), (1, 3)`, pretend we serve `(1, 0)` on the side first, and then serve from the fair distribution `(3, 0), (2, 1), (1, 2), (0, 3)`.  If the pots of soup initially start at `(N, N)`, then after roughly less than `N/2` servings, one pot will still have soup.  Because of the `(1, 0)` servings on the side, this means that roughly speaking, pot `A` is used first if we serve `N/2` fairly from the first pot before `N` from the second pot.

When `N` is very large, this almost always happens (better than 99.9999%, so we can output 1), and we can check this either experimentally or mathematically.

**Algorithm**

We convert all units by dividing by 25 and rounding up.  If `N >= 500` (in new units), then by the above argument the answer is `1`.

Otherwise, we will perform a dynamic programming algorithm to find the answer.  Our Java implementation showcases a "bottom-up" approach, that fills `memo` diagonally from top left to bottom right, where `s = i + j` is the sum of the indices.  Our Python implemtation showcases a "top-down" approach that uses memoization.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(1)$$.  (There exists a constant `C` such that the algorithm never performs more than `C` steps.)

* Space Complexity: $$O(1)$$.  (There exists a constant `C` such that the algorithm never uses more than `C` space.)

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
