862. Find And Replace in String | Algorithms | Medium | String

[TOC]

---
#### Approach #1: Direct [Accepted]

**Intuition and Algorithm**

We showcase two different approaches.  In both approaches, we build some answer string `ans`, that starts as `S`.  Our main motivation in these approaches is to be able to identify and handle when a given replacement operation does nothing.

In *Java*, the idea is to build an array `match` that tells us `match[ix] = j` whenever `S[ix]` is the head of a successful replacement operation `j`: that is, whenever `S[ix:].startswith(sources[j])`.

After, we build the answer using this match array.  For each index `ix` in `S`, we can use `match` to check whether `S[ix]` is being replaced or not.  We repeatedly either write the next character `S[ix]`, or groups of characters `targets[match[ix]]`, depending on the value of `match[ix]`.

In *Python*, we sort our replacement jobs `(i, x, y)` in reverse order.  If `S[i:].startswith(x)`, then we can replace that section `S[i:i+len(x)]` with the target `y`.  We used a reverse order so that edits to `S` do not interfere with the rest of the queries.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(NQ)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `S`, and we have $$Q$$ replacement operations.  (Our complexity could be faster with a more accurate implementation, but it isn't necessary.)

* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$, if we consider `targets[i].length <= 100` as a constant bound.

---

Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
