894. Random Pick with Blacklist | Algorithms | Hard | Hash Table, Binary Search, Sort, Random

[TOC]

## Solution
---

#### Approach 1: Whitelist

**Intuition**

The problem is trivial if we have a whitelist.

**Algorithm**

Create a whitelist by initializing a HashSet with all numbers $$[0, N)$$, removing all blacklisted numbers, and then storing the remaining numbers into a list.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N)$$ preprocessing. $$O(1)$$ pick. Preprocessing is too slow to pass the time limit.
* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$. MLE (Memory Limit Exceeded) will occur.



---

#### Approach 2: Binary Search over Blacklist

**Intuition**

Given a sorted blacklist, we can quickly find the gap between the blacklist numbers where the k-th largest whitelist number would be located. This makes it easy to compute the k-th largest whitelist number.

**Algorithm**

Lets say that we are given a non-empty blacklist $$B$$ and need to figure out what the k-th [zero-based](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-based_numbering) largest whitelist number, hereafter called $$W[k]$$, is.

First, sort the blacklist.

Then, use binary search to find the largest blacklist number which is smaller than $$W[k]$$.

Initially, the search space is the entire blacklist, so $$\text{lo} = 0$$ and $$\text{hi} = \text{len}(B)-1$$.

Loop while $$\text{lo} \neq \text{hi}$$:

* 　$$\text{mid} = \frac{\text{lo} + \text{hi} + 1}{2}$$
* 　$$c = B[\text{mid}]-\text{mid}$$, the number of whitelist numbers less than $$B[\text{mid}]$$.
* If $$c > k$$, then $$B[\text{mid}]$$ is larger than $$W[k]$$. $$B[\text{mid}]$$ and larger blacklist numbers are no longer candidates, so $$\text{hi} = \text{mid}-1$$.
* If $$c \leq k$$, then $$B[\text{mid}]$$ is smaller than $$W[k]$$. Blacklist numbers smaller than $$B[\text{mid}]$$ are no longer candidates, so $$\text{lo} = \text{mid}$$.

At termination, the search space will narrow down to one blacklist number. If it is smaller than $$W[k]$$, it is the largest blacklist number smaller than $$W[k]$$. In this case, the equation for $$W[k]$$ is $$k + \text{lo} + 1$$. If it is larger than $$W[k]$$, no blacklist number is smaller than $$W[k]$$, so $$W[k]$$ is simply $$k$$.

Lastly, to get random whitelist number, randomly pick $$k$$ in $$[0, N-\text{len}(B))$$.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(B\text{log}B)$$ preprocessing. $$O(\text{log}B)$$ pick.
* Space Complexity: $$O(B)$$. Or $$O(1)$$ if in-place sort is used and input array is not considered extra space.



---

#### Approach 3: Virtual Whitelist

**Intuition**

Re-map all blacklist numbers in $$[0, N-\text{len}(B))$$ to whitelist numbers such that when we randomly pick a number from $$[0, N-\text{len}(B))$$, we actually randomly pick amongst all whitelist numbers.

For example, for $$N = 6$$ and $$B = [0, 2, 3]$$ a remapping could look like this:


    


**Algorithm**

Split $$B$$ into two blacklists, $$X$$ and $$Y$$, such that $$X$$ contains all blacklist numbers less than $$N-\text{len}(B)$$ and $$Y$$ contains the rest.

Use $$Y$$ to create $$W$$, a list of all whitelist numbers in $$[N-\text{len(B)}, N)$$. Approach 1 describes an efficient way to create this whitelist.

Define a HashMap $$M$$, where $$M[i] = i$$ by default (when there is nothing assigned to $$M[i]$$ yet), but $$M[i]$$ can also be assigned some other value.

Now, iterate through all numbers in $$X$$, assigning $$M[X[i]] = W[i]$$. Note that $$\text{len}(X) == \text{len}(W)$$.

　$$M[0] ... M[N-\text{len}(B)-1]$$ now maps to all whitelist numbers, so we can randomly pick in $$[0, N-\text{len}(B))$$ to get a random whitelist number.



The implementation below optimizes this algorithm in various ways, but the overall idea remains the same.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(B)$$ preprocessing. $$O(1)$$ pick.
* Space Complexity: $$O(B)$$.
