905. Length of Longest Fibonacci Subsequence | Algorithms | Medium | Array, Dynamic Programming

[TOC]

## Solution
---
#### Approach 1: Brute Force with Set

**Intuition**

Every Fibonacci-like subsequence has each two adjacent terms determine the next expected term.  For example, with `2, 5`, we expect that the sequence must continue `7, 12, 19, 31`, etc.

We can use a `Set` structure to determine quickly whether the next term is in the array `A` or not.  Because of the exponential growth of these terms, there are at most 43 terms in any Fibonacci-like subsequence that has maximum value $$\leq 10^9$$.

**Algorithm**

For each starting pair `A[i], A[j]`, we maintain the next expected value `y = A[i] + A[j]` and the previously seen largest value `x = A[j]`.  If `y` is in the array, then we can then update these values `(x, y) -> (y, x+y)`.

Also, because subsequences are only fibonacci-like if they have length 3 or more, we must perform the check `ans >= 3 ? ans : 0` at the end.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N^2 \log M)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `A`, and $$M$$ is the maximum value of `A`.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(N)$$, the space used by the set `S`.




---
#### Approach 2: Dynamic Programming

**Intuition**

Think of two consecutive terms `A[i], A[j]` in a fibonacci-like subsequence as a single node `(i, j)`, and the entire subsequence is a path between these consecutive nodes.  For example, with the fibonacci-like subsequence `(A[1] = 2, A[2] = 3, A[4] = 5, A[7] = 8, A[10] = 13)`, we have the path between nodes `(1, 2)  (2, 4)  (4, 7)  (7, 10)`.

The motivation for this is that two nodes `(i, j)` and `(j, k)` are connected if and only if `A[i] + A[j] == A[k]`, and we needed this amount of information to know about this connection.  Now we have a problem similar to *Longest Increasing Subsequence*.

**Algorithm**

Let `longest[i, j]` be the longest path ending in `[i, j]`.  Then `longest[j, k] = longest[i, j] + 1` if `(i, j)` and `(j, k)` are connected.  Since `i` is uniquely determined as `A.index(A[k] - A[j])`, this is efficient: we check for each `j < k` what `i` is potentially, and update `longest[j, k]` accordingly.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N^2)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `A`.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(N \log M)$$, where $$M$$ is the largest element of `A`.  We can show that the number of elements in a subsequence is bounded by $$O(\log \frac{M}{a})$$ where $$a$$ is the minimum element in the subsequence.




---


Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
