913. Random Flip Matrix | Algorithms | Medium | Random

[TOC]

## Solution
---

#### Preface:

Because the matrix is given to us in an abstract way, we must design our own representation of the matrix. In addition to being accurate, we would want our representation to have the following properties:

1. It utilizes less space than $$O(\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols})$$, since $$\text{n_rows}$$ and $$\text{n_cols}$$ can be very large.
2. It allows us to generate a random $$0$$ position efficiently, using significantly less than $$O(\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols})$$ time and only one call to the random number generator.

Described below are two different representations which have these properties.

#### Approach 1: Virtual Array

**Intuition**

Let assume that we are given an array-like data structure $$V$$ of size $$\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}$$, where all cells $$V[i]$$ have been initialized to $$i$$th entry in the matrix, and each assignment and access takes $$O(1)$$ time.

This data structure can encode the state of the matrix. How can it encode the state of the matrix in a way that enables efficient generation of random $$0$$ positions?

Also, since this data structure isn't actually given to us, how can we construct this data structure in less than $$O(\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols})$$ time?

**Algorithm**

Data structure $$V$$, described above, obviously cannot be constructed in less than $$O(\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols})$$ time if the initializations are explicit. We must approach it in another way.

We create a new data type which is a slight modification of HashMap, where access to uninitialized key $$k$$ will initialize $$V[k]$$ to the $$k$$th entry in the matrix and then return it, rather than throwing an error. In this way, it is implied that all $$V[k]$$ are initialized to $$k$$th entry in the matrix.

Let the number of $$0$$ entries remaining in the matrix be denoted as $$\text{rem}$$. As we perform $$\text{flip}$$ and $$\text{reset}$$ operations, we update $$V$$ to maintain the invariant that $$V[0] \dots V[\text{rem}-1]$$ map to all $$0$$ entries and $$V[\text{rem}] \dots V[\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}-1]$$ map to all $$1$$ entries.

　$$\text{flip}$$ will change the $$0$$ entry stored at $$V[k]$$ to $$1$$, where $$k$$ is a random integer in the range $$[0, \text{rem})$$. Then, it will decrement rem and swap $$V[k]$$ with $$V[\text{rem}]$$.

　$$\text{reset}$$ will clear $$V$$ of all assigned values and set $$\text{rem}$$ to $$\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}$$.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(1)$$ preprocessing. $$O(1)$$ $$\text{flip}$$. $$O(\text{min}(\text{F}, \text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}))$$ $$\text{reset}$$, where $$\text{F}$$ is the total number of flips.
* Space Complexity: $$O(\text{min}(\text{F}, \text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}))$$.



---

#### Approach 2: Square-Root Decomposition

**Intuition**

Say that we have $$\text{rem}$$ $$0$$ entries left in the matrix and have randomly chosen the $$k$$th $$0$$ entry to be flipped, where $$0 \leq k < \text{rem}$$. Traversing through all $$\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}$$ cells to find its position is too costly. If we split the matrix into roughly $$\sqrt{\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}}$$ contiguous groups of roughly size $$\sqrt{\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}}$$ each, we can find the containing group in $$O\!\left( \sqrt{\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}}\, \right)$$ time and then search through that group in $$O\!\left( \sqrt{\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}}\, \right)$$ time to find the $$k$$th $$0$$ entry.

**Algorithm**

Create roughly $$\sqrt{\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}}$$ buckets, and have the $$i$$th entry in the matrix belong to bucket number $$\dfrac{i}{\sqrt{\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}}}$$.

Each bucket has a $$\text{size}$$ attribute which represents the number of entries in the matrix that map to it. Also, each bucket tracks which of its entries are $$1$$-valued vs $$0$$-valued by storing its $$1$$-valued entries in a HashSet.

To find the $$k$$th remaining $$0$$ entry in the matrix, loop through the list of buckets and use the $$\text{size}$$ and the count of $$1$$s in each bucket to calculate which bucket contains the $$k$$th remaining $$0$$ entry. Then, loop through all entries which belong to this bucket, checking which are $$0$$-valued and which are not, to find out what the $$k$$th remaining $$0$$ entry is.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O\!\left( \sqrt{\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}}\, \right)$$ preprocessing. $$O\!\left( \sqrt{\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}}\, \right)$$ $$\text{flip}$$. $$O(\sqrt{\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}} + \min (\text{F}, (\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols})))$$ $$\text{reset}$$, where $$\text{F}$$ is the total number of flips.
* Space Complexity: $$O(\sqrt{\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols}} + \min (\text{F}, (\text{n_rows} \cdot \text{n_cols})))$$.
