914. Random Point in Non-overlapping Rectangles | Algorithms | Medium | Binary Search, Random

[TOC]

## Solution
---

#### Approach 1: Prefix Sum and Binary Search

**Intuition**

Some rectangles may be more likely to be sampled from than others, since some may contain more points than others, and each point has an equal chance of being sampled. Is there a way to select a rectangle to sample from, such that the probabilities are proportional to the number of points contained in each rectangle? Is there a way to do this using less than $$O(\text{total number of points})$$ space?

**Algorithm**

Create a weight array $$w$$, where $$w[i]$$ is the number of points in $$\text{rects}[i]$$.

Let $$\text{tot} = \sum_\limits{i=0}^{N-1}w[i]$$, where $$N = \text{len}(w)$$.

Compute the prefix sum array $$p$$, where $$p[x] = \sum_\limits{i=0}^{x}w[i]$$.

Generate a random integer $$\text{targ}$$ in the range $$[0, \text{tot})$$.

Use binary search to find the index $$x$$ where $$x$$ is the lowest index such that $$\text{targ} < p[x]$$. $$\text{rects}[x]$$ is the rectangle that we will sample from.

Note that for some index $$i$$, all integers $$v$$ where $$p[i] - w[i] \leq v < p[i]$$ map to this index. Therefore, rectangles will be sampled proportionally to the rectangle weights.

The only step remaining is to choose a random point in $$\text{rects}[x]$$. Generating random $$x\_coordinate$$ and $$y\_coordinate$$ within this rectangle area will suffice, but we can also reuse $$\text{targ}$$ by mapping it to the point

$$
x\_coordinate = x1 + (targ-p[i]+w[i])\ \%\  (x2-x1+1) \\
y\_coordinate = y1 + (targ-p[i]+w[i])\ /\ (x2-x1+1)
$$

This strategy is useful when calls to the random number generator are expensive.


    



Mapping from targ to x_coordinate and y_coordinate for rects = [[1, 1, 2, 4], [3, 2, 5, 4], [2, 5, 5, 6]]





**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(N)$$ preprocessing. $$O(\log(N))$$ pick.
* Space Complexity: $$O(N)$$
