915. Generate Random Point in a Circle | Algorithms | Medium | Math, Random, Rejection Sampling

[TOC]

## Solution
---

#### Approach 1: Rejection Sampling

**Intuition**

It is easy to generate a random point in a square. Could we use randomly generated points in a square to get random points in a circle? Which generated points could we use, and which ones would we need to toss away? How often would we generate points that we could use?

**Algorithm**


    

A square of size length 2R overlaid with a circle of radius R.



To get uniform random points in a circle $$C$$ of radius $$R$$, we can generate uniform random points in the square $$S$$ of side length $$2R$$, keeping all of the points which are at most [euclidean distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclidean_distance) $$R$$ from the center, and rejecting all which are farther away than that. This technique is called [rejection sampling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rejection_sampling). Each possible location on the circle has the same probability of being generated, so the sampling of points will be uniformly distributed.

The area of the square is $$(2R)^2 = 4R$$ and the area of the circle is $$\pi R \approx  3.14R$$. $$\dfrac{3.14R}{4R} = \dfrac{3.14}{4} = .785$$. Therefore, we will get a usable sample approximately $$78.5\%$$ of the time and the expected number of times that we will need to sample until we get a usable sample is $$\dfrac{1}{.785} \approx 1.274$$ times.




**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(1)$$ on average. $$O(\infty)$$ worst case. (per $$\text{randPoint}$$ call)
* Space Complexity: $$O(1)$$.



---

#### Approach 2: Inverse Transform Sampling (Math)

**Disclaimer**

This solution relies on advanced math which is not expected knowledge for a coding interview. It is presented here only for educational purposes.

**Algorithm**

Assume that we are given a circle $$C$$ of radius $$1$$ that is centered at the [origin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Origin_(mathematics)), and our task is to sample uniform random points on this circle.

Lets imagine another circle $$B$$ of radius $$\frac{1}{2}$$ which is also centered at the origin.

The circumference of $$C$$ is twice the circumference of $$B$$, because the circumference of a circle is [directly proportional](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proportionality_(mathematics)#Direct_proportionality) to the radius. Also, the probability of sampling a point from a subregion in circle $$C$$ is directly proportional to the area of the subregion. Therefore, the probability of sampling a point on the perimeter of $$C$$ is twice that of sampling a point on the perimeter of $$B$$.

More generally, what is implied is that the sampling probability is directly proportional to the distance from the origin, from $$0$$ up to $$R$$. This can be modeled as a [probability density function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Probability_density_function) $$f$$, where $$x$$ is the distance from the origin and $$f(x)$$ is the relative sampling probability at $$x$$.

The area under any probability density function curve must be $$1$$. Therefore, the equation must be $$f(x) = 2x$$.

Using our probability density function $$f$$, we can compute the [cumulative distribution function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cumulative_distribution_function) $$F$$, where $$F(x)$$ is the probability of sampling a point within a distance of $$x$$ from the origin.

The cumulative distribution function is the integral of the probability density function.

$$
F(x) = \int{f(x)} = \int{2x} = x^2
$$

Lastly, we can use our cumulative distribution function $$F$$ to compute the inverse cumulative distribution function $$F^{-1}$$, which accepts uniform random value between $$0$$ and $$1$$ and returns a random distance from origin in accordance with $$f$$. $$^{[\dagger]}$$

$$
\begin{align}
& F^{-1}(F(x)) = x \\
& F^{-1}(x^2) = x \\
& F^{-1}(x) = \sqrt{x}
\end{align}
$$

Now, to generate a uniform random point on $$C$$, we just need to compute a random distance $$D$$ from origin using $$F^{-1}$$ and a uniform random angle $$\theta$$ over the range $$[0, 2 \cdot PI)$$.

The points will be generated as [polar coordinates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polar_coordinate_system). To convert to [cartesian coordinates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cartesian_coordinate_system), we can use the following formulas.

$$
X = D \cdot \cos(\theta) \\
Y = D \cdot \sin(\theta)
$$



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity: $$O(1)$$ per $$\text{randPoint}$$ call.
* Space Complexity: $$O(1)$$

**Footnotes**

* 　$$^{[\dagger]}$$ This technique of using the inverse cumulative distribution function to sample numbers at random from the corresponding probability distribution is called [inverse transform sampling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverse_transform_sampling).
* This solution is inspired by  [this](https://stackoverflow.com/a/50746409) answer on Stack Overflow.
