93. Restore IP Addresses | Algorithms | Medium | String, Backtracking

[TOC]

## Solution

---

#### Intuition

The naive solution would be to brute-force, 
_i.e._ to check all possible positions for the dots 
and keep only the valid ones. In the worst case that 
means `11` possible positions and hence $$11 \times 10 \times 9
= 990$$ validations.

That could be optimized with the help of two conceptions.

> The first one is called _constrained programming_. 

That basically means
to put restrictions after each dot placement. 

If one already put a dot that leaves only `3` possibilities
for the next dot to be placed : after one digit, 
after two digits, or after three digits. The first dot has 
only `3` available slots as well.

That propagates _constraints_ 
and helps to reduce a number of combinations to consider.
Instead of $$990$$ combinations it's enough to 
check just $$3 \times 3 \times 3 = 27$$.

> The second one called _backtracking_. 

Let's imagine that one put one or two dots already and that left
no way to place the others to create a valid IP address. 
What to do? _To backtrack_. That means to come back,
to change the position of the previously placed dot and try 
to proceed again. If that would not work either, _backtrack_ again.




---
#### Approach 1: Backtracking (DFS)

Here is an algorithm for the backtrack function
`backtrack(prev_pos = -1, dots = 3)` which takes 
position of the previously placed dot `prev_pos`
and number of dots to place `dots` as arguments :

* Iterate over three available slots `curr_pos` to place a dot. 
   * Check if the segment from the previous dot to the current one is valid :
      * Yes :
        * Place the dot.
        * Check if all `3` dots are placed :
            * Yes :
                * Add the solution into the output list.
            * No :
                * Proceed to place next dots `backtrack(curr_pos, dots - 1)`.
        * Remove the last dot to backtrack. 

!?!../Documents/93_LIS.json:1000,612!?!



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time complexity : as discussed above, there is not more than `27`
combinations to check. 
* Space complexity : constant space to keep the solutions, not more 
than `19` valid IP addresses. 




Analysis written by @[liaison](https://leetcode.com/liaison/)
and @[andvary](https://leetcode.com/andvary/)
