937. Online Stock Span | Algorithms | Medium | Stack

[TOC]

## Solution
---
#### Approach 1: Stack

**Intuition**

Clearly, we need to focus on how to make each query faster than a linear scan.  In a typical case, we get a new element like `7`, and there are some previous elements like `11, 3, 9, 5, 6, 4`.  Let's try to create some relationship between this query and the next query.

If (after getting `7`) we get an element like `2`, then the answer is `1`.  So in general, whenever we get a smaller element, the answer is 1.

If we get an element like `8`, the answer is 1 plus the previous answer (for `7`), as the `8` "stops" on the same value that `7` does (namely, `9`).

If we get an element like `10`, the answer is 1 plus the previous answer, plus the answer for `9`.

Notice throughout this evaluation, we only care about elements that occur in increasing order - we "shortcut" to them.  That is, from adding an element like `10`, we cut to `7` [with "weight" 4], then to `9` [with weight 2], then cut to `11` [with weight 1].

A stack is the ideal data structure to maintain what we care about efficiently.

**Algorithm**

Let's maintain a weighted stack of decreasing elements.  The size of the weight will be the total number of elements skipped.  For example, `11, 3, 9, 5, 6, 4, 7` will be `(11, weight=1), (9, weight=2), (7, weight=4)`.

When we get a new element like `10`, this helps us count the previous values faster by popping weighted elements off the stack.  The new stack at the end will look like `(11, weight=1), (10, weight=7)`.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(Q)$$, where $$Q$$ is the number of calls to `StockSpanner.next`.  In total, there are $$Q$$ pushes to the stack, and at most $$Q$$ pops.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(Q)$$.




---


Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
