964. Minimize Malware Spread II | Algorithms | Hard | Depth-first Search, Union Find, Graph

[TOC]

## Solution
---
#### Approach 1: Depth First Search

**Intuition and Algorithm**

Let `G` be the graph with all the nodes from `initial` removed.

For each node `v` not in `initial`, we want to know which nodes `u` from `initial` can reach `v` in the graph `G` [with `u` (and its edges) added to `G`].  Let's say these nodes `u` "infect" `v`.

Afterwards, we want to know which nodes `v` are uniquely infected by only one `u`.  For each such pair, it contributes 1 to the answer for `u`.

Please see the inline comments for more details.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N^2)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `graph`, as the graph is given in adjacent matrix form.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(N)$$.




---
#### Approach 2: Union-Find

**Intuition**

Let `G` be the graph with all the nodes in `initial` removed.  For each component of `G`, either it neighbors `0`, `1`, or `>= 2` nodes from `initial`.  The result only changes if there is exactly 1 neighbor from `initial`, so we need a way to count this.

**Algorithm**

It is clear that we will need to consider components of the graph.  A "Disjoint Set Union" (DSU) data structure is ideal for this.

We will skip the explanation of how a DSU structure is implemented.  Please refer to [https://leetcode.com/problems/redundant-connection/solution/](https://leetcode.com/problems/redundant-connection/solution/) for a tutorial on DSU.

As above, lets consider the components of `G`: the graph without any nodes from `initial`.

Then, for every edge `uv` in the original graph, where `u` is in initial and `v` is not, we can count that the component at `v` of `G` neighbors 1 more infected node.

Now, for each node `u` in initial, for each component of `G` it neighbors, if that component would only be infected by `u` ("uniquely infected"), then the size of that component contributes to the answer for removing `u`.

We take the best possible answer.



**Complexity Analysis**

* Time Complexity:  $$O(N^2)$$, where $$N$$ is the length of `graph`, as the graph is given in adjacent matrix form.

* Space Complexity:  $$O(N)$$.




---


Analysis written by: [@awice](https://leetcode.com/awice).
